Why it’s important
When you travel, you may be more likely to be exposed to infectious diseases. Your level of risk and the diseases you might be exposed to depend on:
- where you are going
- what activities you are doing
- what sort of contact you have with others.
The risk may be higher because of:
- lower water quality and sanitation
- differences in food safety standards and availability of reliable refrigeration
- exposure to animals, insects, ticks and other parasites that can cause diseases
- outbreaks of diseases including vaccine preventable diseases
- being close to many people – such as on planes and public transport
- taking part in certain social and leisure activities.
There are things you can do to protect yourself and enjoy your trip away.
Before you go
Check travel advice
Research the risks for your destination before you go. Check Smartraveller for the latest travel advice for each country you’re heading to, including any infectious disease risks.
If you are travelling with medicines, plan ahead and understand what you can take with you.
Talk to a healthcare professional
Talk to a travel doctor or other healthcare professional before you go. They can give you advice about ways to reduce your risk for your destination and planned activities.
Your healthcare professional can:
- check that your routine vaccinations are up to date
- tell you whether you need other vaccinations or medications – some countries have vaccination requirements
- let you know other ways to protect yourself – these might depend on where you’re travelling and what activities you’re planning to do.
Discuss travel vaccination with your healthcare professional at least 6 to 12 weeks before you plan to leave Australia.
If you are thinking about travelling overseas for a medical procedure, read the Smartraveller advice and talk to your healthcare professional in Australia about your plans.
Read more about:
- infectious disease risks and vaccinations or other medicines that might be needed for each country
- travel vaccinations.
While you’re away
Take simple steps to stay healthy:
- Prevent mosquito and tick bites, which can cause serious diseases.
- Eat food that’s been well cooked and avoid undercooked or raw dishes that could cause food poisoning .
- Wash your hands often to reduce the spread of germs.
- Wear a mask in crowded places to reduce the risk of respiratory illnesses.
- Practise safe sex to protect against sexually transmissible infections.
- Avoid contact with animals, if possible.
- Consider the risks of getting a tattoo or body piercing overseas – only choose businesses that carefully sterilise their equipment and surfaces.
- Don’t share needles, syringes or other injecting equipment.
If you’re travelling to a part of the world where the tap water might not be safe to drink:
- drink and brush your teeth with bottled water
- avoid ice cubes, as these might have been made with tap water
- avoid raw foods, like salads, that might have been washed in tap water.
If you get sick or need medical assistance while you are overseas, read the Smartraveller advice for Australian travellers.
When you return
When you’re back in Australia, help reduce the spread of disease by:
- looking out for any symptoms of illness
- letting your flight or vessel crew know if you become unwell while travelling, or a biosecurity officer if you are at an airport or seaport
- telling your healthcare professional about your travel if you become unwell after you get home.
Learn more
For more information about travelling safely, see: