About antimicrobial resistance
Antimicrobials are medicines used to treat infections and include:
- antibiotics
- antivirals
- antifungals
- antiparasitics.
Antimicrobial resistance occurs when bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites no longer respond to antimicrobial medicines.
Antimicrobial resistance makes infections difficult – sometimes impossible – to treat.
Antibiotics have saved millions of lives. They make life-saving medical procedures – like organ transplantation, chemotherapy and caesarean sections – safer.
As more bacteria become resistant to antibiotics, common medical procedures become more risky.
Antibiotic resistant infections can lead to longer hospital stays, higher medical costs and, in severe cases, death.
That’s why we all need to work together to tackle the complex health issue of antimicrobial resistance.
What we’re doing
Australia’s National Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy – 2020 and beyond is a 20-year vision.
It sets out key priorities to make sure we continue to have effective antimicrobials to protect the health of humans, animals and the environment.
Australia’s response is guided by a One Health approach that recognises that human, animal and environmental health are all connected – the health of one affects all.
What you can do
Antimicrobials are a precious resource used to protect human, animal and plant health, wellbeing and productivity.
Everyone can take steps to help preserve their effectiveness.
Find out more about what you can do to reduce antimicrobial resistance.
Learn more
Read more about antimicrobial resistance.