The interim Australian CDC will be attending the Public Health Association of Australia 2025 CDIC as an exhibitor.
To be held in Adelaide from 10 to 12 June, the theme of this year’s conference is 'Future directions for immunisation and communicable disease control: embracing ideas, innovations and improvements'.
Those to attend the CDIC will include practitioners, policymakers, and researchers. They will come together to share knowledge, network with peers, and collaborate on strategies to tackle challenges in infectious disease control and immunisation.
Head of the interim Australian CDC, Mary Wood, will deliver a keynote address. Her speech will focus on the work under way to deliver on the Australian Government’s commitment to establishing an independent CDC.
Throughout the event, attendees will also hear from other interim CDC representatives on topics including:
- the National Wastewater Surveillance Program engagement, design, analysis and evaluation stages
- a comparison of the epidemiology of COVID-19 rapid antigen test-diagnosed cases versus laboratory-confirmed cases.
Our staff will also be contributing authors on several other presentations, including diverse topics like listeriosis and vibriosis outbreaks and pertussis increases.
If you're attending CDIC 2025
If you're attending the conference, visit the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing booth. Our friendly team will be there and eager to discuss the current and upcoming work of the interim Australian CDC with you.
Learn more
See more information about: