Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) and subcommittees
The CDNA and its subcommittees provide high-quality surveillance of communicable and notifiable diseases.
Communicable Disease Network Australia (CDNA)
CDNA provides national public health coordination and leadership, particularly around disease surveillance.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) Incident Panel
The CJD Incident Panel provides advice about potential CJD transmission and contamination events.
National Arbovirus and Malaria Advisory Committee (NAMAC)
NAMAC provides recommendations on arbovirus and malaria surveillance, strategic disease management and vector control.
National Blood Borne Virus and Sexually Transmissible Infections Surveillance Subcommittee (NBBVSTI SSC)
NBBVSTI SSC provides expert advice on BBV and STI transmission.
National Respiratory Infections Surveillance Committee (NRISC)
NRISC works to enhance respiratory infection surveillance and foster collaboration among experts in this field.
National Tuberculosis Advisory Committee (NTAC)
NTAC provides advice on the prevention and control of tuberculosis in Australia.
Polio Expert Panel (PEP)
PEP reviews clinical and laboratory data from notified acute flaccid paralysis cases to determine if cases are poliomyelitis or non-polio acute flaccid paralysis.
Other advisory groups and committees
These advisory groups and committees provide advice on public health matters, ensuring we have access to a wide variety of independent perspectives and expertise.
Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN)
PHLN is Australia’s leading network of public health laboratories that have expertise and provide services in public health microbiology in Australia.
Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth)
enHealth brings experts together to advise on environmental factors affecting health. It publishes national guidance on environmental health matters.
Climate and Health Expert Advisory Group (CHEAG)
CHEAG provides advice to support delivery of the National Health and Climate Strategy.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Taskforce
The HIV Taskforce examines opportunities to achieve the virtual elimination of HIV transmission in Australia by 2030.
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Protection (NATSIHP) Subcommittee
The NATSIHP Subcommittee of the Australian Health Protection Committee provides holistic and culturally safe advice on health protection matters for First Nations peoples and communities.
Blood Borne Viruses and Sexually Transmissible Infections Standing Committee (BBVSS)
BBVSS provides strategic advice as part of a coordinated response to BBV and STI across Australia.
National Certification Committee for the Eradication of Poliomyelitis (NCC)
The NCC monitors Australia’s polio-free status and reviews the performance of poliomyelitis surveillance in Australia.