About PFAS
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are human-made (also known as synthetic) chemicals that make products resistant to heat, stains, grease and water.
Due to their widespread use, most people are likely to have had some exposure to PFAS.
Because PFAS can remain in the human body for a long time, as a precaution it is recommended to limit exposure. We work with other government agencies to reduce PFAS exposure in Australia.
Learn more about the Australian Government’s response to PFAS, including:
- information on site investigations
- health advice and links to relevant government departments.
If you find any content about PFAS contamination distressing, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.
Potential effects of PFAS exposure
There is currently limited evidence of human disease or other clinically significant harm resulting from PFAS exposure.
Some studies have found associations between people exposed to some types of PFAS chemicals and the following biological effects:
- increased cholesterol and uric acid levels in the blood
- reduced kidney function
- altered indicators of immunological function
- altered levels of thyroid and sex hormones
- lower birth weight in babies.
- later age for starting menstruations
- earlier menopause.
Exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) has also been associated with an increased risk of testicular and kidney cancer.
These types of PFAS are less common in Australia. These studies are typically from areas where chemicals like PFAS are manufactured, and exposure levels are higher than in Australia.
An ‘association’ to health outcomes does not confirm a direct cause. It is important to distinguish between:
- an association – a relationship between 2 factors
- causation – where one factor is directly responsible for change in the other.
Expert Health Panel on PFAS
An Expert Health Panel on PFAS advised the Australian Government on research, evidence, and health impacts of Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).
The panel produced a final report to outline their key findings and recommendations.
PFAS exposure in Australia
Most people in Australia are likely to have very low levels of different PFAS in their bodies through exposure to items such as:
- stain- and water-resistant fabrics
- paper coatings
- metal plating
- specialised firefighting foams
- cosmetics
- medical devices.
People living near sites where PFAS have been released into the environment in large amounts may have higher PFAS levels in their body.
What we’re doing about PFAS
We work to prevent or reduce environmental and human PFAS exposure wherever possible.
We consider new evidence to make sure policy and guidance supports positive health outcomes.
Health-based guidance values
The Health-based guidance values help protect the community from exposure to PFAS in food, drinking water and recreational water.
They indicate the amount of a chemical a person can consume regularly over a lifetime without any significant risk to their health.
In 2021, PFAS levels in the general food supply were well below the Australian health-based guidance values.
Australian Drinking Water Guidelines
The Australian Drinking Water Guidelines (2011) define what constitutes safe, high-quality water and outline how to achieve it.
In June 2025, the National Health and Medical Research Council updated the guideline values for:
- perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)
- perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS
- perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (PFHxS)
- perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS).
Australian National University PFAS Health Study
In 2016, the Australian National University (ANU) studied the potential health effects associated with PFAS exposure in:
- Katherine, Northern Territory
- Oakey, Queensland
- Williamtown, New South Wales.
ANU released the findings of this study in 2021. They are consistent with previous studies, which confirm PFAS has not shown to cause disease in humans.
PFAS biomarker testing
We funded the Australian Bureau of Statistics to include PFAS biomarker testing in the National Health Measures Survey.
It found that:
- 3 out of the 11 types of PFAS tested (PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA) were detected in more than 85% of the population
- mean PFAS levels were generally higher for older age groups than younger age groups, and generally higher in males than females
- mean levels for the most prevalent PFAS (PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA) were lower in Australia than those reported previously in other countries.
Read more about the PFAS biomarker testing results.
PFAS guidance statement
The Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) Guidance statements on PFAS provides updated health guidance based on recent research into the human health effects of PFAS and exposure in Australia.
enHealth statements are technical science-based documents developed for state and territory public health units to help assess public health risks.
Support
For some, knowing their community is affected by PFAS may increase stress and worry.
Findings from the PFAS Health Study showed people living in PFAS affected communities – irrespective of PFAS blood concentrations – are more likely to experience psychological distress than those in comparison areas.
You can access mental health services and supports, including face-to-face, digital and enquiry services.