The interim Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC) is monitoring avian influenza cases in Australia and overseas. Several strains of the virus continue to circulate worldwide.
Head of the interim CDC, Professor Paul Kelly, said there are outbreaks affecting New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory. But there are no active cases among humans.
“We have seen some cases overseas, and the highest risk there has been among people working in agricultural settings,” Professor Kelly said.
So, what is avian influenza?
Avian influenza is a common virus among all types of birds, sometimes it is called bird flu.
It is endemic in the natural environment in many places around the world, even Australia.
There are many strains of avian influenza and they all have names to identify them, like H1N1, H5N1 or H7N3.
When it spreads to livestock, such as poultry farms, even to backyard chooks or pets, it often requires birds to be put down or euthanised to prevent further spread.
Most of the time the virus is very low risk to humans, but occasionally it jumps between species and infects other types of animals.
Keeping our eye on the world and our own backyard
“The virus now affecting farms in Australia (H7) is not the same as the strain of major concern in the United States (H5),” Professor Kelly said.
“In America, we know their virus has spread from birds into cattle and then to humans.
“These cases in the US have generally been mild, presenting like a case of pink eye (conjunctivitis).
“But we are watching closely, since the migratory patterns of some birds may bring other strains into Australia. Vigilance is our greatest asset at this time.”
Why is the CDC paying attention to a bird virus?
Zoonotic viruses start out in animals but can jump into people and can make people very sick. Understanding these viruses in our environment and in other animals helps ensure we are well prepared should a human outbreak occur.
The interim CDC has a One Health unit which is monitoring issues where animal and agricultural, environmental and human health intersect.
“We are taking a One Health approach to our preparations. This brings together expertise from across health, agriculture and environmental science to ensure, any actions will be strong and decisive to protect all Australians.
What about eggs and poultry meat? Are they safe?
“All of us should be confident today, that our poultry and egg supplies remain safe. It is always important that people cook their poultry products properly,” Professor Kelly said.
Hear Professor Kelly’s interview with ABC’s Country Hour, on the ABC website. (Commencing from 01:40)