IP First Response is an initiative of IP Australia. IP Australia’s Privacy Policy is available here(Opens in a new tab/window).
When you use this tool, IP Australia collects data, which may include personal information. IP Australia is bound by the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) outlined in Schedule 1 of the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (Privacy Act) which regulates how entities may collect, use, disclose and store personal information.
IP Australia will only collect your personal information where it is reasonably necessary for, or directly related to, the performance of our functions or activities.
The information we may collect includes:
Responses to questions that you provide through the navigator tool
If you choose to participate in a survey, your name and/or contact details
Information automatically collected about your interactions with the tool (such as information you spent time on, your journey throughout the tool, materials accessed& mouseclick activity while using the tool).
We use this information to help IP Australia gain a better understanding of its customers’ needs and how IP Australia can improve the tool and its other products/services. If you provide your contact details, we may use these to contact you in relation to the voluntary survey or otherwise about your use of the tool.
Website user and information
In addition to the website use outlined in IP Australia’s Privacy Policy, this website and the tool uses Mixpanel to collect anonymous information about how a user arrives at and interacts with our website. Mixpanel uses first-party cookies and JavaScript code to collect this information. Mixpanel doesn't track any application processes or procedures from online services. You can opt out of Mixpanel analytics by disabling or refusing the cookie or disabling JavaScript.