About preparedness
Preparedness involves proactively anticipating, detecting, monitoring and readying for potential and emerging infectious disease health threats.
It involves:
- ensuring diagnostic testing capability and capacity
- monitoring disease trends through surveillance systems
- identifying, preventing and managing emerging disease threats
- interpreting evidence quickly
- strong working relationships to support collaboration
- timely access to, and delivery of, information
- an effective communication system.
Why it's important
Our preparedness work helps:
- protect the health of Australians and minimise harm
- identify early public health action needed to manage emerging disease threats before they escalate, to reduce their impact
- protect priority populations
- improve speed and coordination across governments during major health threats such as pandemics
- build public confidence in Australia’s readiness to respond to public health threats.
What we’re doing
Horizon scanning
We monitor global and domestic information sources, including:
- scientific research
- global surveillance systems
- expert networks
- global health platforms
- real‑world observations.
This helps us detect early signals, such as:
- emerging novel diseases
- new disease variants
- disease outbreaks
- misinformation trends.
We might use this information to:
- assess risk to determine what action is required, if any
- develop advice to government
- strengthen preparedness and response plans, including for priority populations
- update surveillance priorities
- develop or update public health policy and messaging.
Communicable disease surveillance
We monitor and report on nationally notifiable diseases and domestic and international signals from perennial and emerging diseases that might pose a risk to Australia.
This helps us to:
- identify trends in disease activity, impact and severity
- provide evidence-informed advice
- minimise the impacts of communicable diseases.
Read more about our disease surveillance work.
Pandemic preparedness
As part of our pandemic preparedness work, we:
- are developing the strategic direction to guide our preparedness to major infectious disease outbreaks
- are designing and establishing the National Wastewater Surveillance Program to monitor priority pathogens of pandemic potential
- report annually to the Australian Government Minister for Health on the status of Australia’s readiness for a pandemic
- share information with national, state and territory health departments
- take part in exercises and scenario modelling to test and improve Australia’s pandemic response capabilities.
- regulate the handling of certain high-risk biological agents
- work with various subcommittees that report to the Australian Health Protection Committee (AHPC) to reduce emerging health threats.
Learn more
Read more about:
- our role and priorities
- our communicable disease prevention work
- our environmental health work
- our work on climate and health.