Last updated:
Role
The Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) provides the Australian Health Protection Committee (AHPC) with advice on environmental factors affecting health.
It brings together:
- Australian state and territory health departments
- the National Health and Medical Research Council
- the New Zealand Ministry of Health
- the Heads of Environment Protection Authority Australia and New Zealand.
The committee:
- provides environmental health policy advice
- consults with key stakeholders
- provides environmental health expertise and support for AHPC’s emergency management role
- develops and coordinates research, information and resources on environmental health matters at a national level.
The committee works with:
- Australian local government associations
- professional bodies
- universities
- non-government organisations.
enHealth – Strategic plan (2024–27)
This document sets out the strategic priorities of the Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) for 2024 to 2027.
Terms of reference
enHealth – Terms of reference
This document contains the terms of reference for the Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth).
Members
| Member | Role |
|---|---|
| Evelyn Wong (Chair) | Deputy Chief Health Officer, Environment, Vic Department of Health |
| Tracy Ward (Deputy Chair) | Director of Environmental Health, Public Health Directorate, NT Department of Health |
| TBC | WA Department of Health |
| Dr Chris Lease | Executive Director, Health Protection and Licensing Services, SA Health |
| Victor Martin | Executive Branch Manager, Health Protection Service, ACT Health |
| Stephen Bouwhuis | Assistant Director-General, One Health, Climate and Environment Branch, Australian Centre for Disease Control |
| Stephen Conaty | Director of Environmental Health, Health Protection, NSW Department of Health |
| John Piispanen | Executive Director, Health Protection and Regulation Branch, Queensland Health |
| Nick Bunker | Environmental Health Director, Public Health Services, Tasmanian Department of Health |
| Suz Halligan | Chief Clinical Advisor, Public Health Agency, Ministry of Health New Zealand |
| Tim Hopley | Principal Advisor, Health Protection, Te Whatu Ora – Health New Zealand |
Observers
| Observer | Role |
|---|---|
| Dr Gary Lum | Principal Medical Advisor, Australian Centre for Disease Control |
| Dr Kristal Jackson | Acting Director, Environmental Health, National Health and Medical Research Council |
| Jen Martin | Chief Environmental Scientist, EPA Victoria, Heads of EPA Australia and New Zealand |
| Dr Catherine Kelaher | Senior Medical Advisor, Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Health Protection and Policy, Department of Defence |
Related committees
The enHealth standing committee reports to the Australian Health Protection Committee (AHPC).
enHealth delivers its work plan with the support of multiple expert reference panels, including the:
- Expert Reference Panel on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Environmental Health
- Expert Reference Panel on Environmental Health
- Water Quality Expert Reference Panel
- Radiation Health Expert Reference Panel.
Publications
enHealth guidance
This collection contains publications from the Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth).
Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) – Committee publications
This collection contains the terms of reference, strategic plan and work plan for the Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth).
Contact
enHealth secretariat
Contact the secretariat for the Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) for further information on the committee or previous meeting minutes and agendas.