Legislation
We operate under the Australian Centre for Disease Control Act 2025.
This law defines our role, powers and governance – ensuring that our work to protect public health is transparent, accountable and independent.
We also have responsibilities under other laws that safeguard health, data and privacy, including the:
- Biosecurity Act 2015
- Freedom of Information Act 1982
- National Health Security Act 2007
- National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry Act 2023
- Privacy Act 1988.
Together, these Acts make sure that we operate responsibly and in the public interest.
Independent and evidence-informed
Our Director-General and executive team provide public health advice on the areas we are legally responsible for.
Our advice will always be based on the best available evidence and expertise.
We operate transparently so Australians can trust the integrity of the information we publish.
We use data and information from multiple sources to inform our advice, including
- state and territory health systems
- laboratories
- research institutions
- international partners.
Read more about how we handle data.
Transparency and accountability
Public health advice
We publish our public health advice and the analysis that supports it openly, so that everyone can see the information behind public health decisions.
This requirement is embedded in the legislation to ensure full transparency and accountability.
There are limited circumstances where advice or supporting evidence may not be published. This could be because releasing information could threaten national security or cause harm to individuals or communities.
Register of public health agreements
The Director-General is required to publish a register of public health agreements to further ensure transparency.
These agreements are written arrangements between the Australian CDC and external entities that provide us with information or expert advice on public health matters.
The register does not include informal engagement or unsolicited advice, and it is not intended to record every operational interaction.
Instead, it:
- provides a clear, public record of the formal partnerships that support our evidence base
- helps ensure that our work is informed, independent and accountable.
Register of data directions
To support transparency, we publish a register of data directions. It contains all formal directions the Director-General has issued to a person or organisation to provide information for public health purposes.
Read more about when the Director-General can issue data directions.
Reports and statements
We publish key data, statements and reports to help people in Australia understand health risks and how we are tackling them.
Each year, in our annual report, we report on:
- how prepared Australia is for the next pandemic
- the health impacts of climate change.
Corporate reporting
Our corporate documents will explain how we work and what we do. They also help to make our processes and decisions more transparent to the Australian public.
Open information
We comply with the Freedom of Information Act 1982, which gives Australians the right to access government information.
See how to make a freedom of information request.
Feedback or complaints
Contact us if you:
- have a question
- want to give us feedback.
You can also report any suspected wrongdoings by one of our officers on the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website.