This IP First Response website has been designed to help IP rights holders navigate IP infringement and enforcement by making it visible, accessible, and to provide information about the factors involved in pursuing different options. It does not provide legal, business or other professional advice, and none of the content should be regarded as recommending a specific course of action. We welcome any feedback via our IP First Response feedback form and by emailing us.
What is it?
The Australian Copyright Council (ACC) is an independent, not-for-profit Community Legal Service (CLS). ACC promotes the understanding of copyright law and its application to all art forms.
You can access ACC’s comprehensive, free fact sheet collection for an overview of copyright law and rights in relation to your circumstances. You can also access information about services ACC has available on their website .
What is offered?
- Accessible practical information , education and training on Australian copyright law for creators and consumers.
- No-cost written legal advice (by email) to eligible persons (predominately those who work in creative industries).
What services are not offered?
Note that ACC’s legal advice service does not extend to:
- advice to businesses
- formal legal representation
- drafting documents or letters on behalf of the client
- providing a general review of contracts, policies, agreements or other materials
- engaging in negotiations, litigation or appearing in court on the client’s behalf.
What are the possible outcomes?
- You may gain a better understanding various aspects related to copyright, including information about copyright law and possible enforcement options.
- You may gain a better understanding your rights and decide what to do next in your situation.
- ACC may direct you to other resources to assist with your particular circumstances, including alternative dispute resolution service or legal advice.
What might the costs be?
- Accessing ACC’s online fact sheets and submitting a query to the ACC’s legal advice service is no-cost.
- ACC also offers books for sale on various topics relevant to copyright.
- ACC-facilitated training is available (attendance fees may apply).
How much time might be involved?
ACC’s online resources can be accessed at any time on their website .
The response time for the ACC’s legal advice service is generally between 5-10 working days. However, there may sometimes be delays during periods of heavy demand.
Who can use this?
Creators and consumers of copyright material, including:
- creators working in any medium
- creator industry bodies
- staff of:
- museums
- libraries
- galleries
- education institutions.
What do you need to proceed?
ACC’s online resources can be accessed at any time on its website .
To submit a request for advice, you can click the relevant blue link on ACC’s legal advice webpage . You will be prompted to log into ACC’s system (if you do not already have an account on ACC’s website, you will be prompted to create one).
See also
For more information about copyright infringement see:
- What is IP infringement? | IP Australia First Response
- Infringement 101 | IP Australia First Response
The Attorney-General’s Department’s website also contains information about copyright: Copyright | Attorney-General's Department .
You may also find further information about copyright in resources published by the Arts Law Centre of Australia: Home - Arts Law Centre of Australia . Arts Law is a national community legal centre for artists and the arts.