Last updated:
Filter results
You can narrow down the results using the filters
Audience
Topic
Disease
106 results
Search results
-
Hantavirus infection reported on cruise ship in Atlantic
We are monitoring the hantavirus infection outbreak on a cruise ship in the Atlantic. Hantavirus has never been reported in humans in Australia, but Australians travelling to areas where hantavirus is common should take steps to protect themselves. -
Surveillance that works – finding poliovirus before it finds us
Poliovirus has been detected in a wastewater sample in Perth, Western Australia. Although the risk to the community remains very low, it’s a timely reminder to check you’re up to date with vaccination. -
Poliovirus detected in wastewater in Australia
Routine wastewater surveillance has detected vaccine-derived poliovirus in untreated sewage from the Subiaco wastewater treatment plant in Western Australia. -
Help shape the future of public health – apply to join our Advisory Council
We’re seeking expressions of interest from exceptional people to join our Advisory Council. This is your chance to use your expertise and experience to help protect Australia from health threats, now and in the years to come. -
Applications for Chief Medical Advisor now open
We are seeking an exceptional leader to take on the role of Chief Medical Advisor – a pivotal position at the centre of national public health leadership. This role will help shape how Australia understands and responds to public health risk. -
Australia recognised by WHO for safe containment of poliovirus samples
Australia has been awarded a World Health Organization (WHO) Certificate of Containment for its designated poliovirus laboratory facility. -
Q fever cases hit record high
Last year, Australia recorded 912 cases of Q fever – the highest number since national monitoring began in 1991. If you work around certain animals, take steps to protect yourself. -
Get ready for winter respiratory illnesses
As winter gets closer severe respiratory illnesses are more likely – especially for high-risk groups. We should aways do what we can to prevent illness. But with unusually high levels of flu in late 2025, taking simple steps to protect yourself early will be especially important this winter. -
Travelling? Add measles vaccination to your holiday checklist
A new report confirms that almost all cases of measles in Australia are either acquired overseas or related to an overseas acquired case – especially around school holidays. Don’t bring measles home from holidays – add vaccination to your travel plan. -
New national strategies set path to eliminate hepatitis B and C
Australia has taken a significant step in its commitment to ending hepatitis B and C as public health challenges, with the launch of the Fourth National Hepatitis B Strategy 2025–2030 and the Sixth National Hepatitis C Strategy 2025–2030. -
Whooping cough update – Putting recent reports in context
After higher case numbers in 2024 and 2025, whooping cough activity in early 2026 has returned to levels typically seen between outbreaks. Vaccination during pregnancy and on-time childhood immunisation remain the best protection for babies. -
National snapshot of antimicrobial resistance and use released
The Australian Centre for Disease Control has today released the sixth AURA report, which reveals the latest antibiotic resistance and antimicrobial use data in Australia. -
National snapshot of antimicrobial resistance and use released
The CDC today released the 'Sixth Australian report on antimicrobial use and resistance in human health' (AURA report). The report draws together national data from hospitals, residential aged care and the wider community between 2022 and 2024. -
Fake rabies vaccines in India
Fake rabies vaccines have been reported circulating across India since 2023. Take precautions to protect your health if you received a rabies vaccine in India on or after 1 November 2023. -
Nipah virus infection update
The CDC continues to monitor the Nipah virus situation in India and Bangladesh. -
Nipah virus infections reported overseas
We are monitoring the situation overseas following 2 confirmed cases of Nipah virus infection reported in India. Australians travelling to areas where Nipah virus circulates should take steps to protect themselves. Nipah virus has not been detected in animals or people in Australia. -
Staying cool in a heatwave
The extreme heat taking hold across Australia can cause major – even life-threatening – health issues, especially for people at higher risk of heat-related illness. Here are some tips on coping with a heatwave. -
Help us improve our website
We’re keen to hear from everyone who uses our website how we can improve it. Your input will help us understand your information needs, how well the website responds to those needs and what you expect from it in the future. -
Take care of your health after floods
As floodwaters recede, health risks increase, including infections, mosquito-borne illnesses, and food and water contamination. If you’re in an area affected by floods, take steps to protect your health. -
December respiratory disease data now out
COVID-19 and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) remained stable across December, but flu increased with the ongoing circulation of influenza A(H3N2) subclade K. -
Research grants now available
The Australian CDC invites applications for grants under the Blood Borne Viruses (BBV) and Sexually Transmissible Infections (STI) Research Program. -
Safety advice for bushfires and smoke
If you're in the line of the bushfires burning across Australia, it's important to follow the advice of your local emergency service. And remember that smoke can be just as harmful, even far away from the fire front. Here are some tips on reducing the impact of bushfire smoke on your health. -
A new chapter for public health: The Australian Centre for Disease Control stands up
From today, the Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC) is operating as a standalone national agency, strengthening Australia’s ability to prevent, detect and respond to public health threats. -
Let’s clear the air for a healthier, safer summer
With summer in full swing, many of us gather indoors to beat the heat. But poor indoor air quality and close contact with others can make it easier for germs to spread. So keep indoor air clean to reduce the risk of disease and have a safer summer. -
Be JEV-aware this summer
Japanese encephalitis virus has been detected in animals and mosquitoes in Australia this summer. A highly effective vaccine is available for people at higher risk of contracting the virus. Find out how to stay protected before you take your summer break.