Australians are being reminded that the increase in whooping cough (pertussis) cases across the country may affect people of all ages, but particularly babies and young children.
With cases currently high, the coming holiday period presents an increased risk of the transmission of this infection.
The bacteria affect the lungs and airways, causing cold-like symptoms, runny nose, fever or a mild cough. This can develop into a persistent cough that may last for weeks or months. In some cases, infection may lead to severe complications and life-threatening illness.
Whooping cough can be difficult to diagnose and symptoms may vary among individuals, depending on their age or vaccination status.
If you think you might have whooping cough, or any of the other respiratory diseases currently circulating in the community, please take steps to protect your loved ones over the festive season.
Stay at home if you are feeling unwell, speak with your doctor or healthcare provider if you have symptoms, and get tested before you visit friends or family.
The most effective protection from whooping cough is vaccination.
Get vaccinated against whooping cough, particularly if you are pregnant or spending time with young children or babies this summer.
This year has seen the highest ever recorded cases of whooping cough in Australia, with 54,000 cases reported as at mid-December 2024.
While whooping cough can affect anyone, most cases this year have been in young people aged 10 to 14 years, followed by children aged 5 to 9 years.
While New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria have had the highest number of cases in 2024, cases have been recorded in every state and territory.
Whooping cough is a nationally notifiable disease and health practitioners are required to report cases to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
Vaccination is strongly recommended. For eligible people in at-risk groups, it is provided for free through the National Immunisation Program to:
- infants and children at
- 2 months (but can be provided the vaccine at 6 weeks)
- 4 months
- 6 months
- 18 months
- 4 years
- adolescents aged 11 and 13 years through school-based vaccination programs
- pregnant women (ideally between 20 and 32 weeks).
Parents should always ensure their infants and children receive their whooping cough vaccinations on time and in line with the National Immunisation Program childhood schedule.
Members of families expecting a new baby can speak with their healthcare provider about getting a booster.
When spending time with families and friends this summer, don’t make whooping cough the unwanted surprise guest at your party.
Learn more about whooping cough, symptoms, prevention and vaccinations.