This IP First Response website has been designed to help IP rights holders navigate IP infringement and enforcement by making it visible, accessible, and to provide information about the factors involved in pursuing different options. It does not provide legal, business or other professional advice, and none of the content should be regarded as recommending a specific course of action. We welcome any feedback via our IP First Response feedback form and by emailing us.
What is it?
The Arts Law Centre of Australia (Arts Law) is Australia’s national community legal centre for artists and the arts. It is a not-for-profit organisation that provides free or low-cost legal advice to Australian artists and arts organisations, as well as education and resources.
You can access Arts Law’s information sheets covering various copyright topics in relation to your circumstance. Eligible artists and arts organisations can seek legal advice through Arts Law’s legal query form here .
Further information about the services that Arts Law offers, including who can use them, any costs that apply, how much time might be involved and what would be needed to proceed, may be accessed on its website .
See also
- For more information about copyright infringement see:
- What is IP infringement? | IP Australia First Response containing information about many types of IP infringement.
- Copyright infringement | IP Australia First Response outlines details specific to copyright ownership, rights and infringement
- The Attorney-General’s Department’s website also contains information about copyright: Copyright | Attorney-General's Department .
- You may also find further information about copyright in resources published by the Australian Copyright Council (ACC): Home - Australian Copyright Council . The ACC is an independent not-for-profit Community Legal Service (CLS) whose affiliate members include the peak bodies for Australian writers, musicians, designers, photographers, visual artists, journalists, film makers and architects.