Diseases information
We publish information about communicable diseases in Australia. This includes general information for everyone, and national guidelines and case definitions to support health professionals and public health units.
Diseases A to Z
Information about the communicable diseases we monitor and report on.
Disease prevention advice
Practical advice on how to protect yourself against communicable diseases.
National guidelines for public health units
Disease-specific national guidelines from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) to help public health units respond to communicable diseases.
Surveillance case definitions
Disease-specific definitions from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) to help health professionals decide whether to notify authorities of a case.
Laboratory case definitions
Disease-specific case definitions from the Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) to help laboratory professionals determine whether a disease agent is present.
Surveillance and reporting
We monitor and report on communicable diseases on Australia’s nationally notifiable disease list. These are diseases of national concern that can spread and cause significant harm to human health.
Surveillance systems and networks
The surveillance systems and networks we use to monitor communicable diseases in Australia.
Surveillance and reporting
Our surveillance and reporting activities, which help us identify the trends, impact and severity of communicable diseases.
National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) data visualisation tool
The latest disease case numbers and other data, which you can filter and search.
Communicable Diseases Intelligence
Open access, peer-reviewed articles about epidemiology, surveillance, prevention and control of communicable diseases in Australia.
Other surveillance reports
More surveillance reports and datasets.
Key committees
Our committees play a vital role in disease monitoring and management in Australia. Learn about our advisory committees and groups.
Communicable Disease Network Australia (CDNA)
The CDNA provides national public health surveillance coordination and leadership.
Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN)
The PHLN provide services in public health microbiology in Australia.
Other committees
All the committees and groups we work with and support.