Since December 2024, 6 human infections of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) have been notified in Australia. These were the first human infections diagnosed in Australia since an outbreak in 2021 and 2022.
This week, a northern Sydney man aged in his 70s sadly was reported to have died from the disease.
JEV spreads through bites from infected mosquitoes. There is no specific treatment for JEV infection.
Most people who are infected don’t get any symptoms. A small proportion develop mild symptoms. Fewer than 1 in 100 people infected develop encephalitis (inflammation of the brain), which can lead to severe consequences or even death.
JEV has recently been detected in mosquitoes and animals – including feral pigs – in many parts of Australia. Since 2024, there have been JEV detections in New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia.
The best protection is to avoid getting bitten by mosquitoes and getting vaccinated if you are at risk of being exposed to JEV.
People at increased risk
Mosquitoes spread JEV to people after they have become infected from feeding on infected waterbirds or pigs.
The risk to people varies depending on location, season, weather and other local factors.
Some people are at increased risk of being exposed, including those who spend time in areas with JEV.
If you are concerned about JEV infection, talk to your healthcare professional.
Vaccination
JEV infection is vaccine preventable. States and territories provide free JEV vaccination to eligible people who live or regularly work in areas of high JEV concern.
See who is eligible in your state or territory:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you are not eligible for a free JEV vaccination, you can talk to your healthcare professional about buying one privately.
Read more about Japanese encephalitis vaccination.
Protecting yourself from mosquitoes
You can reduce your risk by:
- using mosquito netting or screens on windows, doors and tents, and patching any splits or tears
- removing standing water where mosquitoes may breed – this includes plant trays or saucers, buckets, or kiddie pools
- regularly cleaning out permanent water containers – such as ponds or pet water bowls – and keeping gutters clear.
When outside, protect yourself against mosquitoes by:
- using insect repellents that contain diethyltoluamide (DEET) or picaridin – always follow the instructions on the label
- wearing long, loose-fitting, light coloured clothing and enclosed footwear
- using insecticide sprays, vapour-dispensing units (indoors) and mosquito coils (outdoors) to repel mosquitoes
- avoiding areas of high mosquito activity.
Learn more
For more information, see: