At the interim Australian CDC, epidemiologists Caitlin (left) and Siobhan (right) lead a team that tracks the ever-changing landscape of acute respiratory diseases threatening Australia.
They interpret and communicate complex information to identify risks, prevent emerging threats and support national responses.
By turning data into insight, and insight into action, they play a vital role in the health of the nation.
The power of data
Data is the lifeblood of an epi’s work.
Using tools like R, STATA, Python, Excel, and PowerBI, our epis make sense of vast datasets gathered from hospitals, general practitioners, central registries, laboratories and communities.
‘Our work is foundational to evidence-based decision-making,’ Siobhan said.
‘We translate complex national disease surveillance data into accessible and actionable intelligence.
‘Each dataset is a piece of the puzzle, informing actions in the face of emerging threats.
‘During a health emergency, we provide real-time data and analysis to guide decisions on interventions, resource allocation and communication strategies.’
Siobhan and Caitlin take pride in finding new ways to communicate surveillance and epidemiological data, so that everyone can benefit – not just scientists.
‘Our team’s development of the Australian Respiratory Surveillance Report last year marked the first combined and comprehensive reporting on COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus in Australia,’ Caitlin said.
‘We know that it is accessed worldwide to inform various public health responses.’
The big picture
Their work isn’t done in isolation, but as part of national and international network of experts.
‘We work closely with a large range of policy teams, communications teams, medical officers, and public health experts,’ Caitlin said.
‘We collaborate with national and international stakeholders, like the World Health Organization, to improve how we capture and use surveillance data.
‘This is what makes the work so impactful, and so interesting and fulfilling.’
Putting people first
Being an epidemiologist demands both precision and compassion, combining the analytical rigor of science with a deep commitment to the people behind the figures.
‘The best part of our job is knowing that our work contributes directly to protecting Australians,’ Siobhan says.
‘Every day, we connect the dots between datasets and real lives, keeping Australians safe.’
The COVID-19 pandemic was a stark reminder of the value of their work.
‘Contributing to the national response was both challenging and deeply rewarding,’ Caitlin said.
‘It highlighted the critical role of epidemiology in understanding this new disease and how best to protect Australians.
‘At its heart, epidemiology is about protecting people. It’s about asking the right questions, harnessing the right data, and working as part of a larger team to protect communities from harm.’
Stronger teams through flexibility
Supporting Siobhan and Caitlin’s important work are the Australian interim CDC’s flexible work policies. These foster a more inclusive workplace, and help to attract and retain a greater diversity of skilled professionals.
‘Job-sharing a leadership role allows us both to spend time with our families and communities, while making sure we still get the job done,’ Siobhan said.
‘It provides a unique opportunity for us to leverage off each other’s strengths and diverse experiences, and to support each other and our team better.
‘It fosters strong communication and collaboration, and truly highlights what can be achieved with dedicated and effective teamwork.’