Australia’s One Health approach to preparing for, and responding to, human, animal, and environmental health challenges is the focus of a new series of webinars.
The One Health Wonders webinars are a joint initiative of:
- the interim Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC)
- the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO).
The CDC’s Dr Stephanie Williams and CSIRO’s Professor Brett Sutton recently launched the series in Canberra.
One Health recognises the connection between the health of humans, animals, plants, and the wider environment (including ecosystems). They all depend on each other.
The aims of the webinar series are to:
- showcase Australia’s One Health research and capabilities
- encourage discussion and collaboration between researchers and policy-makers
- raise understanding of One Health principles in government departments
- encourage a greater uptake in Australia of the One Health approach.
The first webinar featured 2 speakers:
- Director of the CDC’s One Health Unit – Dr Sarah Button
- CSIRO Senior Research Scientist, Health and Biosecurity – Dr Kim Blasdell.
Dr Britton explained the benefits of working across different sectors, taking a One Health approach, to protect and prepare for increasing risk of threats.
Dr Kim Blasdell presented on ‘Buruli ulcer: An Australian vectored zoonosis’.
Dr Blasdell showcased the latest research on Buruli Ulcer, an emerging Australian zoonotic disease. She also highlighted the benefits of taking a One Health approach to responding to outbreaks of the disease.
The CDC and CSIRO will hold the next One Health Wonders seminar in coming weeks.
Photo caption – Director of the interim Australian CDC’s One Health Unit, Dr Sarah Britton, addressing the first One Health Wonders webinar.