About occupational respiratory diseases
Occupational respiratory diseases are work-related conditions that affect the airways, lungs and blood vessels.
Physicians can only report diagnoses of respiratory diseases that are caused or exacerbated by a patient’s occupation.
Diseases included in the registry
There is a difference between prescribed and non-prescribed occupational respiratory diseases.
Prescribed occupational respiratory diseases
Prescribed occupational respiratory diseases diagnosed on or after 22 May 2025 are mandatory to report to the national registry.
Prescribed occupational respiratory diseases vary depending on where the patient is diagnosed.
For all states and territories except Queensland, silicosis is the only prescribed occupational respiratory disease.
The following physicians in Queensland must report additional diagnoses of prescribed occupational respiratory diseases to the national registry:
- occupational and environmental medicine physicians
- respiratory and sleep medicine physicians.
Queensland
In Queensland, prescribed occupational respiratory diseases are:
- cancer (for example, mesothelioma)
- chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including chronic bronchitis and emphysema
- pneumoconiosis, including:
- asbestosis
- coal workers’ pneumoconiosis
- mixed-dust pneumoconiosis
Silicosis is a prescribed occupational respiratory disease under the National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry Act 2023. It is mandatory for Queensland prescribed medical practitioners to report silicosis to the registry.
Learn more about Queensland prescribed occupational respiratory diseases.
New South Wales
Physicians in New South Wales must notify silicosis to the registry, but do not need to report it to NSW Health.
Non-prescribed occupational respiratory diseases
Non-prescribed occupational respiratory diseases are not mandatory to report to the registry.
Physicians can choose to report non-prescribed occupational respiratory diseases to the national registry, with patient consent.
For more information about when and how to get patient consent, see the patient privacy notice and consent forms.