At a glance
- No vaccine available – read more about prevention
- Nationally notifiable disease
About STEC and HUS
Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) are a group of bacteria that make Shiga toxins in the gut. These toxins can cause bloody diarrhoea.
Less commonly, STEC leads to HUS, a life-threatening condition that damages red blood cells and the kidneys. HUS can also be caused by other illnesses such as shigellosis, and some medications.
STEC most often spreads through contaminated food.
Why it matters to public health
STEC can cause severe gastroenteritis and serious complications.
About 1,000 STEC infections are reported in Australia each year. A very small number of these people develop HUS.
STEC and HUS are most common in young children aged under 5 years, who are also most likely to become very sick or die.
Outbreaks of STEC are most often caused by contaminated food.
Because there’s no vaccine, prevention relies on safe food practices, good hygiene, and timely public health action when infections are reported.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
STEC causes gastroenteritis symptoms, including:
- diarrhoea, which might become bloody
- severe abdominal cramps
- nausea
- vomiting.
Most people improve within a week. But some people get serious complications such as dehydration or sepsis.
Some STEC infections progress to HUS. This is most common in children aged under 5 years.
HUS symptoms include:
- passing no or little urine, which might be bloody
- pale skin
- easy bruising or a rash of tiny red spots
- extreme tiredness or drowsiness.
HUS is a life-threatening medical emergency. Serious complications can include:
With treatment, most people recover from HUS within a few weeks. But about 1 in 10 people with HUS die, or permanent kidney failure.
Read more about the symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of HUS.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a healthcare professional. If you develop any severe symptoms, see your healthcare professional immediately.
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms of STEC infection usually start 3 to 4 days after getting infected. But this can range from 1 to 10 days.
Symptoms of HUS usually begin within a week of diarrhoea starting.
How it spreads
STEC is found in the gut and faeces of animals – especially cows.
People can be infected if the bacteria enter their mouths. This can happen through:
- consuming contaminated food and drinks
- swimming in or drinking contaminated water
- contact with farm or petting zoo animals
- close contact with an infected person, including changing nappies or soiled bedding.
Some food and drinks pose a higher risk of STEC, including:
- undercooked beef – especially mince
- salad vegetables – especially leafy greens
- unpasteurised (raw) milk or milk products
- unpasteurised fruit juices.
Read more about STEC in food.
Infectious period
Most people have the bacteria in their stool for about a week. But in some people – especially children – this can be up to 3 weeks.
STEC can survive for weeks to months in the environment, including in animal faeces, soil and water.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against STEC infection.
Protect yourself
The best protection is to safely prepare, handle and cook food.
It is especially important to:
- thoroughly cook beef mince (including burgers and sausages) to 75 °C in the centre
- wash raw vegetables and fruit under running water before eating
- use clean cutting boards and knives for ready-to-eat foods
- wash cutting boards and knives with hot soapy water
- not consume unpasteurised (raw) milk or raw milk products
- avoid drinking untreated water.
Good hand hygiene is also important, especially:
- after touching animals
- when around someone who is sick
- when preparing and eating food.
Read more about STEC in food and food safety.
Protect others
People with STEC should follow their healthcare professional’s advice, which might include:
- washing hands often
- avoiding preparing food for others, if possible
- staying away from work, school and childcare while sick.
People who work as food handlers should not attend work until 48 hours after symptoms stop.
Children and childcare staff should not attend childcare until 24 hours after diarrhoea or vomiting stops. Staff should also not handle food until 48 hours after recovery from these symptoms.
Always follow advice from your state or territory government or workplace – local recommendations can differ.
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting STEC or getting very sick from it.
Certain settings are also more likely to spread STEC infections, including:
- food venues
- early childhood education and care centres
- residential care homes.
People at greater risk should take steps to protect themselves.
People at greater risk of severe disease
STEC infection poses a greater risk of severe gastroenteritis for:
- babies or young children under 5 years
- older people
- people who are immunocompromised.
Babies and children aged under 5 years and people aged over 65 years are also at greater risk of developing HUS and getting very sick from it.
People at greater risk of exposure
People are at greater risk of being exposed if they:
- regularly consume higher risk foods or drinks – especially undercooked beef mince
- are in contact with farm animals (especially cattle), their faeces or their meat
- have close contact with an infected person
- swim in or drink untreated fresh water.
Diagnosis and treatment
STEC infection is usually diagnosed through a stool test. Sometimes a blood test might be used.
HUS is diagnosed by assessing signs and symptoms and through blood tests.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Most people with STEC infections recover in about a week with supportive care, such as drinking plenty of fluids. Some people may be cared for in hospital.
STEC infections are usually not treated with antibiotics or anti-diarrheal medicines, as they can increase the risk of HUS.
People with HUS need urgent medical attention and will usually be treated in an intensive care unit.
Read more about how to manage or treat STEC or HUS.
Surveillance and reporting
STEC and HUS are nationally notifiable diseases – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report cases of STEC and HUS to us through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
The OzFoodNet network monitors and responds to foodborne diseases in Australia, including STEC infections.
This is part of national surveillance to monitor case numbers and understand disease patterns.
Use our data visualisation tool to search the latest data.
Outbreaks
The response to STEC outbreaks in Australia focuses on:
- finding the likely source of infection
- preventing further infections.
State and territory health departments investigate outbreaks by:
- collecting information about potential exposures, such as foods consumed or contact with animals
- identifying other people who might have been exposed to the bacteria
- working with food safety agencies and distributors to trace where food came from
- testing foods, drinks and environmental samples.
Outbreak control measures might include:
- providing education about STEC and how to prevent it, such as safe food handling and hand hygiene
- advising people with STEC to stay home from work, school or childcare while symptomatic – this may be longer for people undertaking certain jobs or activities that increase the risk of spreading STEC to others
- recalling contaminated food.
Read more about how the Australian Government defines and plans for outbreaks.
Support
For information about STEC and HUS in your state or territory see:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.
For travel advice, see Smartraveller.