Why it’s important
Floods can cause significant health issues.
Floodwater can:
- be contaminated by sewage and animal waste
- contaminate water supplies
- disrupt utilities and services, like electricity
- carry and spread bacteria
- promote mould growth
- displace animals
- provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes.
This increases the risk of:
- bacterial infections, including melioidosis and leptospirosis
- ear, nose and throat infections
- gastroenteritis
- injuries
- animal bites
- mosquito-borne illnesses
- mould-related illnesses
- spoiled or lost medicines
- spoiled or contaminated food and water
- contaminated water supplies
- carbon monoxide poisoning from generators.
Follow the advice of your local and state governments and emergency services. Your local ABC radio is a reliable source of information.
Preventing injury and disease
If you feel unwell or have been injured, seek medical care. If it’s an emergency, call 000.
Cuts and open wounds can be contaminated with flood water which can cause serious infection. As well as providing treatment, your healthcare professional can advise on whether you need a tetanus vaccine booster.
Severe trauma-related infections can be life-threatening.
Contact with floodwater and mud
Avoid walking or wading through floodwaters or mud, which can be contaminated. This is especially important if you have broken skin or wounds, or some chronic conditions like diabetes, kidney disease or lung disease.
If you can’t avoid it, such as when cleaning up:
- wear protective clothing, including
- long pants
- long sleeves
- fully covered, waterproof shoes
- waterproof or rubber gloves
- glasses
- a well-fitted P2 or N95 mask, if you have it
- be mindful of slippery surfaces, hidden debris and objects under water, and falling trees
- don’t touch your face
- wash your hands regularly and thoroughly
- wash any wounds that have been in contact with flood water with clean water and apply an antiseptic
- cover and protect any cuts, scrapes or wounds with a waterproof dressing
- if any wounds look infected, speak to a doctor about your contact with flood water – they may recommend specific antimicrobials to help you recover
- shower and change as soon as possible afterwards.
If you need clean-up assistance, seek help from your local or state government or State Emergency Service (SES).
Food and water
Take steps to prevent foodborne illnesses.
Do not eat food that:
- has been in contact with floodwater
- might have spoiled – for example, if the power has been out and the fridge and freezer have been off.
Drink bottled water, if possible. Contact your local council to check whether the local water supply is contaminated. If in doubt, boil all drinking water before use.
Animal and insect bites
Watch out for displaced creatures like insects, spiders, snakes, rats, and crocodiles in some regions. Some animal bites can be life-threatening.
If bitten, apply first aid and seek medical care.
Protect yourself against mosquitoes to prevent mosquito-borne diseases, like:
Your home
If you are able to continue living in your home after a flood:
- open doors and windows on dry days
- run fans or de-humidifiers if possible, to help reduce moisture and the risk of mould
- only use generators outside.
Medicines
Discard medicine if:
- it has been in contact with floodwater
- it is refrigerated medicine that couldn’t be kept cold – for example, because of power outages.
If it is essential medicine, such as insulin, check with a doctor or pharmacist. Medicines Line (1300 633 424) can also answer questions about medicines.
If you have lost your prescription or medicines, contact your pharmacist or healthcare professional as soon as possible.
Pharmacists can call your doctor to make sure you can still get the prescription medicines you need. In some cases, you can get your medicines without a script.
Read more about getting medicines after a flood.
Accessing health care
If healthcare services are disrupted in your area, you can find a health service through:
- staff in evacuation centres
- healthdirect’s health service finder.
To speak with a registered nurse 24/7, call healthdirect on 1800 022 222. Depending on your symptoms, you may be connected virtually to a GP.
healthdirect can also connect you to your local Medicare Urgent Care Clinic.
If you need urgent help from police, fire or ambulance services, call triple zero (000).
Mental health support
Experiencing a natural disaster can be extremely stressful and has a significant impact on mental health. Find mental health support.
More information
For more information and support, see:
- the Australian Government disaster recovery assistance
- healthdirect’s floods and cyclones advice page
- the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing’s natural disaster support page.
For advice from your state or territory authority on cyclones and floods, go to:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia
For local State Emergency Services support, see: