Many parts of Australia are home to mosquito-borne disease, such as Japanese encephalitis, Ross River virus and Murray Valley encephalitis.
A confirmed case of infection with Japanese encephalitis virus, or JEV, has been found in a resident of Victoria, prompting a warning from the Victorian Chief Health Officer.
Most JEV infections show very few or no symptoms. But some cases can be very serious, and even deadly. Read more about the symptoms of JEV infection.
There is no specific treatment for JEV infection, so taking good precautions and prevention provide the best defence against it and other mosquito-borne illnesses.
You can reduce the risk by:
- removing standing water where mosquitos may breed – this includes plant trays or saucers, buckets, or kiddie pools
- regularly cleaning out permanent water containers – such as ponds or pet water bowls – and keeping gutters clear
- using mosquito netting or screens on windows, doors and tents, and patching any splits or tears.
When outside, protect yourself against mosquitoes by:
- using insect repellents that contain diethyltoluamide (DEET) or picaridin, and always follow the instructions on the label
- wearing long, loose-fitting clothing and enclosed footwear
- using insecticide sprays, vapour-dispensing units (indoors) and mosquito coils (outdoors) to repel mosquitoes
- avoiding areas of high mosquito activity at dawn and dusk.
JEV infection is vaccine preventable. States and territories provide free vaccination to eligible people who live or regularly work in areas of high JEV concern.
See who is eligible in your state or territory:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
Read more about avoiding mosquitoes and JEV.