At a glance
- Vaccine preventable – check who’s eligible
- Nationally notifiable disease
About COVID-19
COVID-19 is a highly contagious respiratory infection.
It is caused by a virus called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
There are many subtypes, or variants, of SARS-CoV-2. Variants are monitored for their ability to spread more easily or cause more severe illness.
COVID-19 symptoms can be mild to severe. Most people recover within a few days, but some people are at greater risk of getting severely unwell.
Some people, including those with mild or no symptoms, might have longer-term effects after having COVID-19. This is known as long COVID (or post-acute sequelae of COVID-19).
Why it matters to public health
COVID-19 continues to circulate and cause serious illness in Australia.
Each year in Australia, COVID-19 causes around:
- 2,000 to 5,000 deaths
- 110,000 hospitalisations.
The number of COVID-19 infections in the community can go up and down in ‘waves’. COVID-19 waves don’t follow a regular seasonal pattern. They can happen when:
- new variants circulate in the community
- immunity wears off over time.
COVID-19 can have a major impact on:
- people – through illness and complications leading to hospitalisation and death
- our health system – through added demand on healthcare professionals, clinics and hospitals
- businesses and our economy – through missed school and work and reduced productivity.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Common symptoms of COVID-19 include:
- runny or stuffy nose
- cough
- sore throat
- fever, chills or sweats
- headaches
- muscle aches and pains
- fatigue.
Less common symptoms include:
- changes in smell or taste
- nausea
- vomiting
- diarrhoea
- shortness of breath.
Symptoms can range from mild to severe. They usually resolve within days to weeks, but the cough can last longer.
About 1 in 4 people with COVID-19 don’t have any symptoms.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a doctor.
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start 3 to 4 days after infection, but this can range from 2 to 14 days.
How it spreads
COVID-19 mainly spreads through droplets or smaller airborne particles from an infected person’s respiratory tract. When people talk, cough or sneeze, these travel through the air and land on people and surfaces.
COVID-19 can spread to others when these droplets or particles:
- come into contact with their mouth, nose or eyes
- are breathed in
- land on surfaces or objects which people touch and then touch their mouth, nose or eyes.
The risk of COVID-19 spreading is highest when there is close, face-to-face contact. But it can spread over larger distances, especially indoors.
People can be infected more than once.
Infectious period
The length of time people with COVID-19 can infect others varies. But people are usually considered infectious:
- from 48 hours before symptoms appear
- from 48 hours before the first positive test, if there are no symptoms
- until symptoms are gone, which can be up to 10 days.
Some people may be infectious for longer, such as those who are severely ill or have a weakened immune system.
People with COVID-19 are usually most infectious just before their symptoms start and in the first 3 days of having symptoms.
People can still spread the virus, even if they have no symptoms.
Prevention
Vaccination
The best way to protect yourself is to get vaccinated – the COVID-19 vaccine reduces your risk of severe illness, hospitalisation and death.
Other prevention steps
You can help protect yourself and others by:
- staying at home if you have symptoms
- improving ventilation, such as by opening windows
- putting physical distance between yourself and others, especially when indoors
- wearing a face mask when around others, especially when indoors
- regularly washing your hands
- coughing or sneezing into your elbow or a tissue and disposing of used tissues in the bin (then washing your hands afterwards).
Read about more ways to prevent the spread of COVID-19 and other respiratory viruses.
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting COVID-19 or getting very sick from it.
COVID-19 can spread quickly in crowded places and some settings, such as:
- hospitals
- residential care facilities – including aged care or disability care homes
- childcare centres
- schools.
If you are at greater risk of severe disease, it is especially important to:
- get your COVID-19 vaccination
- take steps to protect yourself
- avoid crowded places, if you can
- avoid contact with anybody with COVID-19 or who has symptoms
- talk to a healthcare professional as soon as symptoms start – they might prescribe antiviral medicines, if you are eligible.
People at greater risk of severe disease
Older people are most at risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
COVID-19 also poses a greater risk of severe illness for people who are:
- living with some chronic conditions
- immunocompromised
- living with a disability
- pregnant
- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Read more about who is at greater risk of severe disease.
People at greater risk of exposure
Anybody who spends time around other people can be exposed to COVID-19. But people who have a lot of contact with others might be more likely to be exposed. This includes through their jobs, living situation, or recreational activities.
Diagnosis and treatment
COVID-19 is usually diagnosed through laboratory testing of a sample collected from the nose or throat with a swab.
Rapid antigen tests that can be done at home are also widely available from supermarkets and pharmacies.
Read more about COVID-19 tests.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Most people with COVID-19 get better without any specific treatment. Mild symptoms can be managed with supportive care.
You should see your healthcare professional if you are very unwell or at greater risk of severe illness. They might prescribe antiviral medicines, if you’re eligible.
Antibiotics are not used to treat COVID-19, because they do not work for viral infections. Taking antibiotics when you don’t need them can increase the risk of antibiotic resistance.
Read more about how to manage or treat COVID-19.
Surveillance and reporting
COVID-19 is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new laboratory confirmed cases to us through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
COVID-19 data is also collected through other surveillance systems, guided by the Australian National Surveillance Plan for COVID-19, Influenza, and RSV.
We analyse and report on COVID-19 data through:
- the Australian Respiratory Surveillance Report
- our data visualisation tool, where you can search the latest data.
These are part of national surveillance to monitor COVID-19 case numbers and disease patterns.
Outbreaks
In some situations, a COVID-19 outbreak might require a public health response. This might include outbreaks involving:
- high-risk settings, such as residential care homes and hospitals
- a new variant that might be of concern to public health.
Read more about how the Australian Government defines and plans for outbreaks and pandemics.
Support
For information about COVID-19 in your state or territory, see:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.