Health impacts of water quality
Water is essential for life. It helps our bodies stay hydrated, supports digestion, regulates temperature, and removes waste. Without clean water, people can become sick and even die.
Water pollution happens when harmful substances get into groundwater or bodies of water like lakes, rivers, and oceans. These substances make the water unsafe to use or harm the plants. Animals and people who live there.
Water can be polluted by many things, including:
- germs
- organic waste
- plastic
- rubbish
- fertilisers
- pesticides
- toxic chemicals
- sediments
- heat
- oil
- radioactive materials.
The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water is the main agency responsible for maintaining water quality in our waterways.
The Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) provides advice on water quality and human health. See:
- The role of toxicity testing in identifying toxic substances in water
- Guidance on the use of rainwater tanks
- Reducing exposure to metals in drinking water from plumbing products
- Lead in drinking water from some plumbing products
- Guidelines for Legionella control.
Flood contamination
After major flooding, toxic waste, oil, plastics, fertilisers and detergents can contaminate floodwater.
If untreated, they can flow to underground water systems and other water sources.
Learn more about flooding and floodwater and how to protect your health during and after a flood.
Bushfire contamination
Bushfires are becoming more frequent and intense due to climate change.
After a bushfire, higher levels of debris, dead animals, fire retardants and ash can reduce water quality.
Fire damage to rainwater tanks can also contaminate rainwater. Read the New South Wales Government's fact sheet about what to do to protect your rainwater supply before and after a bushfire.
Learn more about bushfires and water quality.
Pipes, water distribution and plumbing
In Australia, most drinking water pipes are lead free, but many other plumbing products such as brass fittings contain lead.
Ingesting lead through water can cause:
- cardiovascular issues
- decreased kidney function
- reproductive issues.
Young children, infants and fetuses are particularly vulnerable.
The National Health and Medical Research Council manages both drinking water and recreational water guidelines.
For more information, see:
- Reducing exposure to metals in drinking water from plumbing products
- Lead in drinking water from some plumbing products.
Legionellosis
If an air conditioner or warm water system has a Legionella bacteria contamination it can cause legionellosis.
Regular inspections, disinfection and maintenance of cooling towers and plumbing systems limit the growth of the bacteria.
Read the enHealth guidelines for legionellosis control and risk-assessment for health and aged care facilities.
Groundwater
Groundwater is water that collects and flows beneath the earth’s surface.
Communities in dry parts of Australia often use groundwater on crops and as drinking water.
Groundwater contamination lasts for a long time, as groundwater moves much slower than rivers and streams.
Water quality testing
The Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) issues guidance on water quality testing for identifying toxic substances.