Last updated:
We regularly add new topics and diseases to this website. In the meantime, additional information remains on the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing website.
5 results
Search results
-
Climate and health
Climate change affects the health of people, animals and the environment. Work is underway across government to make the Australian health system and communities resilient and responsive to a changing climate. -
Communicable diseases prevention and control
Communicable diseases are a significant health issue in Australia and around the world. We work to protect Australians against disease outbreaks, and reduce their impact on people and our economy. -
Environmental health
The physical, chemical and biological environment we live in affects our wellbeing. Clean drinking water, good hygiene, effective pest and disease control, and good housing are important to our overall health. Find out what we’re doing to improve environmental health in Australia. -
National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry
The National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry stores data on occupational respiratory diseases in Australia. It will help to reduce, eliminate, and improve our understanding of preventable occupational respiratory diseases. -
One Health
We take a One Health approach to managing health challenges in Australia. This ensures policies and programs recognise the intrinsic link between the health of humans, animals and the environment, for a better coordinated and effective response to our health challenges.