This IP First Response website has been designed to help IP rights holders navigate IP infringement and enforcement by making it visible, accessible, and to provide information about the factors involved in pursuing different options. It does not provide legal, business or other professional advice, and none of the content should be regarded as recommending a specific course of action.
While IP Australia has taken care to ensure the material provided is as correct and accurate as possible, IP Australia makes no warranty or representation that the material is complete or free from error we accept no legal responsibility regarding the accuracy and reliability of material on this website.
We don't provide professional advice
This website doesn't provide any legal, financial or business advice, or advice on business strategy. It is also not a substitute for professional advice.
IP Australia makes this website available on the understanding that you will exercise your own skill, care and judgment with respect to its use. For example, you should carefully evaluate the accuracy, currency, completeness and relevance of the information obtained from this website and draw your own conclusions for your specific circumstances and purposes.
If you're seeking legal details, information or professional advice, you should:
Material on this website may include, or provide external links to, content or recommendations of third parties. They don't necessarily reflect our views or indicate our commitment to a particular course of action. We also have no control over the content of linked sites.
We:
Give no assurances about the quality, lawfulness, accuracy or relevance of material on any linked site.
Accept no legal responsibility regarding the accuracy, lawfulness and reliability of external material.
Don't endorse any material, associated organisation, product or service on other sites.
Website security
Our internal network and databases are protected from unauthorised access through numerous security controls, including:
A firewall.
Intrusion detection.
Other protection technologies.
However, the internet is an unsecure public network. There's always a potential risk that your transactions are being viewed, intercepted or modified by third parties.
We accept no liability for any interference with or damage to your computer, software or data occurring in connection with this website or its use.
Further information
If you have any suggestions or questions about this website's content, contact us.