Last updated:
Filter results
You can narrow down the results using the filters
Audience
Topic
Disease
35 results
Search results
-
Diphtheria in Australia – Epidemiological updates
This collection contains reports with information about the epidemiology of diphtheria in Australia. -
Evidence reviews
This collection contains evidence reviews prepared by independent experts that we commissioned. -
National strategies for bloodborne viruses and sexually transmissible infections
This collection contains national strategy documents that address the impact of bloodborne viruses and sexually transmissible infections on the Australian community. Together they form a framework and agreed direction for a high-quality, coordinated national response to these diseases. -
Nipah virus 2026 situation reports
These situation reports provide updates on the outbreak of Nipah virus in India. They reflect the CDC's role in monitoring disease activity, assessing risks to Australia and providing evidence-informed public health advice. -
SSBA – Fact sheets
This collection includes fact sheets about the Security Sensitive Biological Agents (SSBA) Regulatory Scheme. -
SSBA – Guidelines
These guidelines support the Security Sensitive Biological Agents (SSBA) Regulatory Scheme. -
Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports – 2026
This collection contains Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports from 2026. We publish these surveillance reports regularly throughout the year. -
Register of public health agreements
This register provides transparency about formal arrangements where we engage external organisations to supply information or expert advice on public health matters. It includes commissioned work – whether financial or in-kind – but does not record informal engagement or unsolicited advice. -
Register of data directions
This collection contains any formal directions issued by the Director-General to request information needed for public health purposes. These directions are used sparingly, and only when other routine or voluntary arrangements cannot provide the information needed to protect public health. -
NORDR – Resources for physicians
This collection contains user guides, forms, and reports to support physicians working with the National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry (NORDR). -
NORDR – Resources for patients
This collection contains information for patients about the National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry (NORDR). -
NORDR – Resources for governments
This collection contains user guides, collection notice, and reports to support governments working with the National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry (NORDR). -
National syphilis monitoring reports
This collection contains monitoring and surveillance reports for cases of syphilis in Australia. -
Tick bite–associated illnesses – Resources for the health sector
See resources on tick bite diseases and symptoms attributed to tick bites. -
Tick bite–associated illnesses – Resources for the general public
See resources on tick bite diseases and symptoms attributed to tick bites. -
National Immunisation Strategy for Australia resources
This collection includes the current and previous version of Australia's National Immunisation Strategy and supporting resources. -
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Taskforce – Communiques
This collection contains communiques from the HIV Taskforce. -
PHLN COVID-19 publications
This collection contains publications and statements related to COVID-19, produced by the Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN). -
Mould related-illness
This collection contains documents about mould and mould-related illness, including state and territory resources on mould. -
CDNA Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs)
This collection contains all of the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs). These guidelines give nationally consistent advice and guidance to Public Health Units to help them respond to notifiable diseases using best practice. -
CDNA National Guidelines for healthcare workers on managing bloodborne viruses
This collection contains the Communicable Diseases Network (CDNA) National Guidelines and accompanying fact sheets for healthcare workers living with, or at risk of exposure to, bloodborne viruses. -
CDNA surveillance case definitions
This collection contains surveillance case definition documents for nationally notifiable diseases within Australia. The Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) created these definitions to help health professionals decide whether to notify authorities of a case. -
PHLN laboratory case definitions
This collection contains laboratory case definition documents for the diagnosis of key diseases in Australia. The Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) created these definitions for laboratory staff to use when determining if one of these diseases is present in a sample. -
Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports – 2025
This collection contains Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports from 2025. We publish these surveillance reports regularly throughout the year. -
Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports – 2024
This collection contains Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports from 2024. We publish these surveillance reports regularly throughout the year.