About STIs
STIs are common – 1 in 6 Australians will get an STI in their lifetime.
STIs are spread through direct contact and bodily fluids during sexual activity, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Some STIs can spread:
- through skin-to-skin contact
- from pregnant people to their babies.
If left untreated, some STIs can be serious and cause complications, including infertility.
STIs during pregnancy can present a serious risk for unborn babies.
See the different types of STIs.
Prevention
To prevent the spread of STIs, it’s important to get tested regularly – including if you are pregnant – and have regular sexual health check-ups.
People with STIs often have no symptoms.
Protecting yourself
The best way to prevent STIs is to practise safe sex. You should:
- talk openly with your sexual partner (or partners) about STIs
- not have sex if anybody involved has symptoms that could be due to an STI – including in their mouth, anal or genital areas
- make sure you and your partner (or partners) have been tested for STIs before you have sex
- always use a barrier – like a condom or dental dam – for vaginal, anal or oral sex
- use condom-safe lubricants to reduce the chance of condoms tearing
- consider protection when in unexpected situations – such as when travelling or attending parties
- not share sex toys and wash them thoroughly each time you use them.
Speak with your healthcare professional:
- about STI testing before you have sex with a new partner
- if you think you might be at risk of HIV – HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is prescribed for some people to reduce the risk of getting HIV
- as soon as you can if you get STI symptoms – don’t have sex until you have been tested and your healthcare professional has told you it’s safe to have sex
- as soon as you can if you think you’ve been exposed to
- an STI or another infection that can be transmitted through sex – like mpox or hepatitis C
- HIV – there are medicines that can reduce your risk of getting HIV if you take them soon after you have been exposed.
- if you are a gay or bi+ cisgender man or trans woman, to find out whether you are eligible for doxy-PEP – doxy-PEP can reduce the risk of some STIs if taken soon after sexual contact
- to discuss whether you should be vaccinated against
Any unwanted sexual behaviour that you have not consented to is sexual assault. The National Sexual Assault, Domestic and Family Violence Counselling Service provides support for people experiencing violence and abuse. Call 1800 737 732 or go to 1800Respect.org.au.
Protecting others
If you’ve been diagnosed with an STI, you should:
- not have any type of sexual contact until your healthcare professional (or a public health unit) has told you it’s safe to have sex
- get regular sexual health check-ups, even after you have been treated, because you can get STIs again
- let your sexual partners know, so that they can get tested and treated – you can do this anonymously through
You should not have sex with current or previous partners until they have been tested and, if necessary, treated and are no longer infectious.
If you need help telling recent sexual partners about your STI diagnosis, talk to your healthcare professional. They can give you advice and help you decide the best approach.
Types of STI
STIs include:
- chlamydia
- donovanosis
- ectoparasites (like pubic lice)
- genital herpes
- gonorrhoea
- hepatitis B
- human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
- human papillomavirus (which causes genital warts)
- lymphogranuloma venereum
- Mycoplasma genitalium infection
- syphilis
- trichomoniasis.
Other infections that can be spread during sex include:
Learn more
Read more about: