There’s lots of information online and in the news about mpox. Not all of it is true.
Let's go through some common questions and misconceptions about mpox so you have all the facts.
See useful resources about mpox symptoms, transmission and vaccines.
Is everyone at risk of getting mpox?
Anyone can get the mpox virus if they are exposed, regardless of sexual orientation, age, race or gender. In Australia, almost all cases of mpox have been in men.
Most of these people have been in the gay, bisexual and men who have sex with men communities.
Is mpox an STI?
Mpox is not an STI, but it can be spread via sexual contact.
The most common way mpox spreads between people is through physical contact with someone who has the virus. This can include touching, kissing, oral sex and penetrative sex.
Mpox can also spread through:
- contaminated objects like bed linen, clothing or towels
- other close contact with rashes, blisters or sores on skin
- coughing or sneezing.
Should everyone get the mpox vaccine?
No. You should only get the vaccination if you’re in one of the high-risk groups, including:
- sexually active gay, bisexual or other men who have sex with men (GBMSM)
- sex workers
- people living with HIV.
If you’re unsure, chat to your health professional.
Will mpox cause Australia to go into another lockdown?
There’s no plans to implement a lockdown due to the current mpox outbreak.
COVID-19 lockdowns happened because it is highly transmissible airborne disease; mpox is not this type of disease.
Is mpox deadly?
There’s been no mpox-related deaths in Australia to date. For most people, mpox is a mild disease and there is a vaccine available to help keep people safe.
For a small number of people, severe cases of mpox can be fatal.
Can I get mpox from monkeys?
Yes. You can get mpox from infected monkeys and other animals, but the risk is low.
The mpox strains that are currently spreading in Australia are from human-to-human transmission.
Is mpox caused by COVID-19 vaccines?
No. Mpox is a viral disease that’s completely separate from COVID-19 and its associated vaccines.
Is mpox a new disease?
No. Mpox was first discovered in monkeys in 1958 in Denmark. The first human case was recorded in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 1970.
Is it too late to be vaccinated if I have just been exposed to mpox?
If you’re exposed to mpox, getting vaccinated within 4 days of the initial exposure offers the best chance of preventing the disease.
Speak to your health professional if you have symptoms or think you might’ve been exposed to mpox.
Stay up to date with the latest information and health advice on mpox.