1 December marks World AIDS Day, a time to reflect, raise awareness, and take action. This year’s theme – 'No one left behind' – aims to raise awareness of the role everyone plays in ending the stigma around HIV, and reminds us to work together to tackle inequities in access to prevention, treatment and care.
Why addressing stigma matters
Stigma remains one of the biggest barriers to HIV testing, treatment, and care. When stigma is removed, people are more likely to seek early diagnosis, access treatment, and experience better mental health, stronger social connections, and improved quality of life.
In Australia, some groups still face stigma and discrimination on a day-to-day basis, including:
- First Nations peoples
- people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds
- communities in regional and remote areas.
'No one left behind' reminds us that we can create supportive environments where everyone living with HIV can thrive, free from stigma and discrimination.
How you can get involved
There are lots of ways you can get involved this World AIDS Day. Community organisations around Australia are hosting World AIDS Day events.
Visit the World AIDS Day website to find an event in your local area.
Can’t attend an event? Get involved another way by:
- wearing on a red ribbon and use it to start conversations about stigma, the people living with HIV/AIDS, and why it’s important to end transmission and ensure fair access to prevention, treatment, and care
- encouraging testing – Share local testing information, especially for communities facing access challenges
- elevating the voices of people living with HIV, particularly from under-represented communities – personal stories can be powerful tools against stigma
- using social media or community forums to challenge myths and misinformation, while promoting empathy and respect
- donating time, funds, or services to groups working with people living with HIV and populations at risk of acquiring HIV.
Together, we can ensure no one is left behind.
Learn more about events and other ways to get involved.