PID Act
The Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 is a legislative scheme for the reporting and investigation of allegations of serious wrongdoing in the Commonwealth public sector.
The objectives of the Act are to:
- promote the integrity and accountability of the Commonwealth public sector
- encourage and facilitate the making of public interest disclosures (PIDs) by public officials
- ensure that public officials who make PIDs are supported and protected from adverse consequences relating to the disclosures
- ensure that disclosures by public officials are properly investigated and dealt with
- ensure that PID officers refer serious or systemic corruption issues to the National Anti-Corruption Commission.
PID procedures
Our PID procedures ensure compliance with the:
Section 59 (3) states: ‘The principal officer of an agency must, by instrument in writing, establish procedures for facilitating and dealing with public interest disclosures relating to the agency.’
What an internal PID is
An internal PID is a disclosure:
- by a current or former public official
- of information that tends to show ‘disclosable conduct’
- made to an authorised officer or supervisor of the discloser.
Information on this page applies to internal PIDs only. See the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website for more information on other types of PIDs, such as:
- emergency disclosure
- external disclosure
- legal practitioner disclosure
- National Anti-Corruption Commission disclosure.
What ‘disclosable conduct’ means
Disclosable conduct is defined in s29 of the Act and includes conduct that:
- contravenes a law
- is corrupt
- wastes public funds
- abuses public trust
- unreasonably endangers health, safety and/or the environment
- could, if proved, give reasonable grounds for disciplinary action resulting in the termination of the official's engagement or appointment.
Who can you make a disclosure to
You can make a disclosure to:
- your supervisor (if you work for the Australian Centre for Disease Control)
- an authorised officer at the Australian CDC, if the conduct relates to the Australian CDC.
How to make a disclosure
You can make a disclosure by contacting us.
Disclosure to the Ombudsman
If you are concerned about making a disclosure to the Australian CDC, you can make a disclosure to the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
What information to include
To help us assess and properly investigate your PID, you should include:
- your name and contact details, unless you want to be anonymous
- details of the alleged wrongdoing
- whether you think the alleged wrongdoing could be considered corrupt conduct
- who committed the alleged wrongdoing
- when and where the alleged wrongdoing occurred
- relevant events surrounding the issue
- whether you did anything in response to the wrongdoing
- others who know about the wrongdoing and have allowed it to continue
- whether you’re concerned about possible reprisals as a result of making your disclosure
- any supporting documentation and/or any witnesses.
Learn more
For more information, go to the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website or email us.