Current status
hMPV is not new. It’s a common respiratory virus, including in Australia.
Respiratory illnesses like hMPV increase during winter. So, the current increase in the northern hemisphere is not unusual. But we are monitoring the situation both domestically and internationally.
In a news report, the World Health Organization (WHO) notes that China’s reported levels of acute respiratory infections, including hMPV, are as expected for the winter season.
Incidence of hMPV in Australia
Although there is no national collection of hMPV data in Australia, some data are available from sentinel general practice sites.
It shows that in 2024 (up until 15 December), 7.8% of people who presented with fever and cough symptoms and were tested for a respiratory pathogen, had hMPV.
This is lower than other common respiratory infections, including rhinovirus, influenza, COVID-19 and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).
About hMPV
hMPV spreads by:
- droplets in the air that contain the virus
- direct contact with mucus or saliva.
hMPV generally causes a mild infection similar to a common cold or RSV infection.
Symptoms can include:
- cough
- fever
- runny or blocked nose
- headache
- tiredness.
Young children, older adults and people with weakened immune systems are at high risk of complications, which can include bronchitis or pneumonia.
Protecting yourself and others
You can protect yourself and others by:
- washing your hands regularly, including after sneezing or coughing
- avoiding sharing cups, glasses and cutlery with people who are sick
- covering your nose and mouth with a tissue or with your elbow when coughing or sneezing
- wearing a face mask, especially if you are unwell
- staying at home when unwell
- keeping children home from school or other early childhood education and care settings when they are unwell.