Manuscript submission guidelines
To ensure the efficient handling of submitted manuscripts, authors must submit the following documents and files at one time by email:
- Article submission form
- Article in MS Word format – all manuscripts must be complete, and include
- an abstract
- up to 10 keywords
- all figures and tables captioned (and each with at least one citation within the text)
- acknowledgments
- a statement confirming ethics approval for the study, or the grounds for a waiver of same
- author details, including postal (and optionally telephone) and email contact details for the corresponding author
- Article charts in an appropriate format (MS Excel or otherwise) – see instructions for authors
- Article illustrations in an appropriate format, at 300dpi resolution or higher – see instructions for authors
- Depending on submission circumstances, either a
Copyright transfer
Articles accepted for publication in CDI must have copyright transferred to the Australian Government before publication. You must complete one of the following forms (not both).
Copyright transfer agreement form
For articles for which the Australian Government does not already hold copyright, you must submit a copyright transfer agreement form as part of the submission package.
The form also includes notification of the privacy implications of publication.
The authorised author must accept the form’s stated privacy implications.
APP5 privacy notification form
The Australian Government might already hold copyright where an article is a deliverable contracted by the:
- Australian Centre for Disease Control
- Department of Health, Disability and Ageing.
This is the case for most CDI annual and quarterly report submissions.
In these cases, you should complete an APP5 notification form instead of the copyright transfer agreement.
If you are unsure
The copyright transfer agreement also covers the APP5 privacy provisions. If you are unsure which form to complete, use the copyright transfer agreement.