In the rural surrounds of Darwin, Northern Territory, Bees Creek is the home of Australia’s newest medical and emergency responder training facility.
The site supports the National Critical Care and Trauma Response Centre (NCCTRC) in training the Australian Medical Assistance Teams (AUSMAT). Doctors, nurses, paramedics, logisticians, and allied health staff from all Australian states and territories will hone their skills at the world-class training centre.
Located 30 minutes from Darwin city centre, the facility sits among Bees Creek’s rural properties. The harsh climate and sparse infrastructure will help to prepare emergency medical teams for the conditions they may face when deployed.
Department of Health and Aged Care First Assistant Secretary, Carita Davis, works in the interim Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC). She represented the CDC at the new facility’s opening ceremony.
‘The site covers around 20 hectares, and you could describe it as austere,’ Ms Davis said. ‘That’s exactly what we are looking for. When AUSMAT arrive in a disaster zone, there often isn’t much infrastructure there.
‘The site includes training rooms, outdoor areas, a commercial kitchen and accommodation for up to 30 personnel during training.’
The Australian Government funded the building of the centre on a site provided by the Northern Territory Government.
Up to 30 NCCTRC staff and AUSMAT personnel will provide training year-round at the facility. This includes:
- online learning
- classroom training
- simulations for real world emergencies.
‘AUSMAT teams are amazing. In a health emergency, they can be on the ground, providing care in the first days after a disaster strikes,’ Ms Davis said.
The Australian Government established the NCCTRC in 2004 following the 2002 Bali Bombings.
It is part of Australia’s capability to respond to health emergencies here and overseas.
‘As well as training AUSMAT, the NCCTRC also delivers teaching, simulated exercises and research. It is world renowned in preparing for health emergency and disaster response.’
AUSMAT teams have worked in countries such as:
- Thailand – 2018 cave rescue
- Samoa – 2019 measles outbreak
- Vanuatu – 2023 twin cyclone event.
They have also provided care and advice to remote Australian communities during the COVID-19 pandemic, and other countries including:
- Papua New Guinea
- the Solomon Islands
- Fiji
- Timor Leste.
Photo caption – Celebrating the official opening of the new NCCTRC’s Bees Creek Training Facility, from left to right:
-
Northern Territory Minister for Health, Selena Uibo
-
Executive Director of the National Critical Care and Trauma Response Centre, Professor Len Notaras AO
-
Assistant Minister for Indigenous Health, Senator The Hon. Malarndirri McCarthy
-
A/g First Assistant Secretary for Health Security and Emergency Management Division, Carita Davis.