Environment and health
The environment we live and work in can affect our health. It can cause or worsen many medical conditions, including:
- allergies and asthma
- lung and respiratory diseases
- heart disease
- some types of cancer.
Clean drinking water, good hygiene, effective pest and disease control, and good housing are all important to our overall health.
Who we work with
We share responsibility for managing environmental health with:
- other Australian Government agencies
- state and territory governments
- independent bodies.
We work closely with the:
- Australian Government Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water – manages most national environment protection activities
- Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry – works to protect animal health and prevent pest and disease
- Australian Industrial Chemicals Introduction Scheme – assesses the risks of industrial chemicals and promotes their safe use
- Bureau of Meteorology – Australia's weather, water, climate, ocean and space weather information agency
- National Emergency Management Agency – develops, leads and coordinates Australia’s connected and collaborative approach to emergency management
- National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) – provides advice on environmental issues
- Office of Gene Technology Regulator (OGTR) – regulates genetic modification
What we’re doing
Advice and guidance
Together with state and territory governments, we coordinate environmental health advice to:
- the Australian Government Minister for Health and Aged Care
- Australian Government and state and territory agencies
- the general community.
We provide advice on the human health aspects of:
- air quality
- climate change
- environmental contamination and toxins
- per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
- occupational dusts
- water quality.
Risk assessment support
We provide advice and resources for environmental health risk assessments.
Emergency management guidance for health practitioners
enHealth’s Disaster and emergency management for environmental health practitioners guide assists healthcare practitioners to plan and respond to disasters and emergencies.
Environmental Health Standing Committee
The Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) works to promote equal access to safe and healthy environments for all Australians, by providing advice on environmental health.
enHealth is a standing committee of the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee.
State and territory environmental health management
State and territory governments generally manage local environmental health issues.
These include smoke, chemicals, toxic minerals and other materials that can affect the quality of our air, food and water supply.
Learn more about each jurisdiction’s activities: