At a glance
About hepatitis A
Hepatitis A is viral infection of the liver. Infections are rare in Australia.
It is usually mild and most people make a full recovery. Some people are at higher risk of getting severely unwell.
Vaccination and good hygiene are the best ways to prevent the spread of hepatitis A.
Why it matters to public health
Hepatitis A can cause outbreaks and illness, especially in people who have not been vaccinated or haven’t had the disease before.
In Australia, cases of hepatitis A have fallen since the 1950s due to:
- better hygiene and sanitation
- improved water supply
- the introduction of an effective vaccine
- effective public health actions to limit outbreaks and prevent further cases.
Hepatitis A is still common in many countries with poor water and sanitation. Contaminated food imported from these countries can cause outbreaks in Australia.
Although hepatitis A outbreaks are rare, they can have a big impact on public health.
Because of this, we:
This helps to identify and manage hepatitis A cases and contacts to reduce the risk of spread.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Hepatitis A is usually mild, and many people will not have any symptoms. Adults and older children are more likely to develop symptoms than young children.
Common symptoms include:
A few days later, you might develop:
- dark-coloured urine
- light-coloured stools
- jaundice (yellow skin and eyes)
- itchy skin.
Some people can develop further complications and might need hospitalisation. Rarely, people require a liver transplant.
Read more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis A.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Check your symptoms
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start 15 to 50 days after getting infected.
How it spreads
Hepatitis A is highly contagious. You can get infected after ingesting the virus by:
- eating contaminated raw, frozen or undercooked food
- drinking contaminated water
- handling soiled nappies, linen or towels of an infectious person
- sharing personal items with an infectious person, such as toothbrushes
- having close or intimate contact (including oral or anal sex) with an infectious person.
The hepatitis A virus can survive in the environment – including on surfaces, in water and in frozen food – for several months.
Infectious period
People with hepatitis A are considered infectious from 2 weeks before symptoms start until either:
- 1 week after jaundice appears (if it occurs)
- 2 weeks after symptoms start (if jaundice does not occur).
Prevention
Vaccination
Get vaccinated
Hepatitis A vaccination is recommended for:
- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children living in:
- the Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Western Australia
- people with medical risk factors
- people whose occupation or lifestyle increases their risk
- people who travel to areas where hepatitis A is endemic.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in higher-risk areas can get hepatitis A vaccines for free under the National Immunisation Program at 18 months and 4 years of age. If you are not eligible for a free vaccine, you can buy one from your health professional or pharmacy.
Other prevention steps
The best ways to protect against hepatitis A are to:
- regularly wash your hands, especially after going to the toilet or touching soiled nappies or anything with body fluids
- regularly clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces
- dispose of sewage safely
- handle food hygienically – from production to consumption
- get vaccinated, if recommended.
Protecting others
If you have hepatitis A, you should:
- see your doctor or healthcare professional immediately
- until advised by your doctor or healthcare professional that you can resume normal activities, avoid:
- preparing food or drink for other people
- providing personal care to others
- attending childcare, school or work
- sharing utensils, towels or personal items with other people
- having close or intimate contact (including oral or anal sex) with others.
Read more ways to prevent hepatitis A.
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting hepatitis A or of getting very sick from it.
Hepatitis A can spread quickly in certain settings, including:
- early childhood care centres
- schools
- food outlets and other places food is handled
- residential care facilities
- disability settings
- correctional and detention centres
- sex-on-premises venues.
If you are at greater risk, it is especially important to:
People at greater risk of severe disease
Hepatitis A poses a greater risk of severe illness for people who:
- are older
- are immunocompromised
- have chronic liver disease (including hepatitis B or hepatitis C)
- have had a liver transplant.
People at greater risk of exposure
Some people are more likely to be exposed to hepatitis A because of their job, where they live, travel habits, or activities. This might include people who:
- live, work or care for children in remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities in
- the Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Western Australia
- work in early childhood and childcare services
- care for people with developmental disabilities
- work in plumbing and with sewage
- travel to countries where hepatitis A is more common
- have anal sex
- inject drugs
- are in correctional facilities.
Diagnosis and treatment
Your healthcare professional can arrange a blood or faecal test to diagnose hepatitis A.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Find a health service
There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A. You can manage mild symptoms by:
- resting
- drinking fluids
- avoiding alcohol.
If you have more severe symptoms or complications, you may need to go to hospital for treatment.
Read more about how to manage or treat hepatitis A.
Surveillance and reporting
Hepatitis A is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new diagnoses to us daily through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
We also collect and analyse data on hepatitis A cases through the OzFoodNet Network. This includes details about people’s travel acquisition, risk factors, and food consumption history.
This is part of our routine surveillance activities, which help us monitor case numbers around the country, understand disease patterns, and identify outbreaks.
We analyse the data and report on case numbers through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
Outbreaks
Health authorities respond differently depending on where hepatitis A outbreaks occur.
For cases in food handlers, outbreak control measures might include:
- keeping food handlers who are infected, or might be infected, away from work
- providing vaccination or protective medicine to close contacts of cases
- cleaning and disinfecting kitchen surfaces and utensils
- issuing public notices about symptoms to prevent further spread.
For outbreaks in childcare and case-based facilities, outbreak control measures might include:
- keeping people who are infected, or might be infected, away from others in the facility, if possible
- offering vaccination or protective medicine to close contacts of cases
- cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces and objects (like toilets, toys, change tables, cutlery)
- informing staff and families about symptoms and how to prevent further spread.
For widespread food sources (such as an imported frozen fruit), outbreak control measures might include:
- recalling contaminated food
- sending out national or regional media alerts
- working with food safety agencies and distributors to trace where the food came from
- putting up signs in stores about symptoms to prevent further spread.
Read more about how the Australian Government defines and plans for outbreaks and pandemics.
Support
For information about hepatitis A in your state or territory see:
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.
For information on staying safe from hepatitis A while travelling, see:
Quick links
Disease
Infectious agent
The hepatitis A virus is a member of the Picornaviridae family.
Clinical presentation
Hepatitis A is usually mild and self-limiting. Symptoms generally last 1 to 3 weeks.
The likelihood of symptoms developing increases with age.[1]
Symptoms are uncommon in children under 6 years of age. However, at least 70% of infected adults develop symptoms. [2]
Initial symptoms typically include:
A few days later, people may develop:
- dark-coloured urine
- light-coloured stools
- jaundice (yellow skin and eyes)
- pruritis (itchy skin).
Complications include:
- relapsing hepatitis
- extrahepatic disease, such as arthritis, vasculitis and myocarditis
- autoimmune hepatitis.
Rarely, people may develop fulminant hepatitis requiring liver transplantation.
Most people recover completely within 2 to 6 months. Up to 1 in 5 infected people require hospitalisation.
Read more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis A.
Public health importance
Hepatitis A is a vaccine-preventable viral infection. It has the potential to cause illness and outbreaks, especially among people who have not previously been exposed to the virus. Although large outbreaks are rare, they can cause:
- significant demands on hospital and public health resources
- economic impacts, such as temporary closures of affected food establishments or facilities.
Hepatitis A is still common in many countries with poor water and sanitation. Australians travelling to these regions are at increased risk of getting infected, especially if they are not vaccinated. Occasionally, outbreaks in Australia have been linked to imported food products from areas where the hepatitis A virus is endemic.[3] [4]
For this reason, effective surveillance and timely public health actions are essential to control and reduce the impact of hepatitis A.
Because of this, we work to:
Epidemiology
Hepatitis A virus infections in Australia have significantly declined since the 1950s, largely due to:
- better hygiene and sanitation
- improved safe water supply
- availability of an effective vaccine
- effective public health actions to limit outbreaks and prevent further cases.
Hepatitis A notification rates in Australia have shown a consistent downward trend, falling from over 10 cases per 100,000 people in the 1990s to fewer than 1 case per 100,000 by the 2010s.
In 2024, there were 240 hepatitis A cases reported in Australia, with a notification rate of 0.9 per 100,000 people.
In 2005, the National Immunisation Program introduced a hepatitis vaccination program for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in high-risk areas.
Since then, notification rates among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people – previously at least 5 times higher than those in non-Indigenous populations – have significantly declined. They are now lower than rates in non-Indigenous people.
Despite relatively low disease prevalence, sporadic hepatitis A outbreaks still occur in Australia. These are often linked to:
- overseas travel to endemic regions
- imported food products (for example, frozen berries)
- small outbreaks arising from close contact with infected individuals including among:
- childcare and early learning settings
- people who inject drugs[5]
- people who experience homelessness, due to person-to-person transmission.[5]
For the latest information on hepatitis A cases in Australia, see our data visualisation tool.
Spread of infection
Transmission
Hepatitis A is highly contagious and is mainly spread through the faecal–oral route.
The virus can survive in the environment – including on surfaces, in water and on frozen foods – for several months. [6] [7] [8]
Transmission can happen by:
- eating contaminated raw, frozen or undercooked food
- drinking contaminated water
- touching your mouth after handling soiled nappies, linen or towels of an infectious person
- sharing contaminated personal items, such as toothbrushes
- close or intimate contact (including oral or anal sex) with an infectious person
- caring for an infectious person.
Incubation period
Symptoms usually start 15 to 50 days after exposure.[9]
Infectious period
People are considered infectious from 2 weeks before symptoms start until either:
- 1 week after jaundice appears (if it occurs)
- 2 weeks after symptoms start (if jaundice does not occur).
In some cases, people can remain infectious for up to several months.
Priority populations
People at greater risk of severe disease
People who are not immune to hepatitis A – either through past infection or vaccination – are at increased risk of severe disease if they:
- are older
- are immunocompromised
- have chronic liver disease (including hepatitis B or hepatitis C)
- have had a liver transplant.
Read more about measures people can take to protect themselves.
People at greater risk of exposure
People who are at risk of acquiring hepatitis A include those who are more likely to be exposed through their work, travel, activities or where they live. This might include people who:
- live, work or care for children in remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities in
- the Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Western Australia
- work in early childhood and childcare services
- care for people with developmental disabilities
- work in plumbing and with sewage
- travel to countries where hepatitis A is more common
- have anal sex
- inject drugs
- are in correctional facilities.
See what measures people can take to protect themselves.
Settings at increased risk of spread
Hepatitis A can spread quickly in homes and other settings, including:
- early childhood centres
- schools
- settings where food is handled
- residential care facilities
- disability settings
- correctional and detention centres
- sex-on-premises venues.
An outbreak in these settings may require a public health response.
Read more about the prevention, control and public health management of outbreaks.
Prevention
Vaccination
A safe and effective vaccine is available against hepatitis A.
Two vaccine doses at least 6 months apart will provide protection against infection for many years.
Hepatitis A vaccination is funded under the National Immunisation Program for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children living in the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia at:
- 18 months of age
- 4 years of age.
Vaccination is also recommended for certain high-risk groups, including people:
- with medical risk factors
- whose occupation or lifestyle increases their risk
- who travel to areas where hepatitis A is endemic.
See:
Other prevention steps
Other prevention measures include educating people about:
- hand hygiene, especially after going to the toilet or touching soiled nappies or other items contaminated with body fluids
- avoiding touching the face, mouth, eyes, or nose while providing care (such as childcare or disability care) or handling human waste and sewage
- hygienic food handling – from production to consumption
- appropriate food standards and safety
- ensuring appropriate protections for occupational and lifestyle-related exposures.
Diagnosis and clinical management
Diagnosis
Hepatitis A is diagnosed by detecting antibodies against hepatitis A virus in the blood of a person with symptoms.
Nucleic acid amplification testing (such as PCR) can be used on blood or faecal samples.
Laboratory case definition
The Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) has developed standard case definitions for the diagnosis of key diseases in Australia. This document contains the laboratory case definition for hepatitis A.
Clinical management
There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A.
Clinical management consists of supportive care, including:
- rest
- adequate fluid intake.
Notification and reporting
Surveillance case definition
This document contains the surveillance case definition for hepatitis A, which is nationally notifiable within Australia. State and territory health departments use this definition to decide whether to notify us of a case.
National notification and reporting
Confirmed and probable cases of Hepatitis A are nationally notifiable in Australia. This means certain health professionals must report diagnoses through their relevant health authorities.
Check how to report hepatitis A cases in your state or territory:
State and territory health authorities report new cases to us through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, as part of our surveillance activities.
We report case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
We also monitor cases and their associated risk factors including travel, food consumption and other exposure history through the OzFoodNet Network.
This helps us to:
- identify trends in hepatitis A activity and impact
- rapidly identify and control common sources of infection in hepatitis A outbreaks
- assess the impact of disease control initiatives
- inform public health policies to minimise the impact of hepatitis A infection.
Public health response
National public health guidelines
These guidelines for Public Health Units provide nationally consistent guidance on how to respond to hepatitis A. They are part of a Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs) published by the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA).
Management of cases
Public health units investigate all cases of hepatitis A. Case management focuses on:
- determining the likely source of infection
- identifying cases whose activities may put others at risk of infection, such as food handlers
- ensuring control measures, including safe hand hygiene practices, to prevent further spread.
Australia has low population immunity to the hepatitis A virus, so a single infected person could result in an outbreak. This is especially true for:
- food handlers
- childcare workers
- healthcare workers
- people who have anal sex.
People with hepatitis A should be provided information about how to minimise the risk of infecting others, including advice to avoid:
- preparing food or drink for other people
- providing personal care to others
- attending childcare, school or (if they may put others at risk) work
- sharing utensils, towels or personal items with other people
- having close contact (including sex) with others.
Read more about how state and territory health department manage cases.
Public health units undertake contact tracing to:
- identify all potential contacts
- assess the susceptibility of contacts to infection
- provide advice and public health education.
Susceptible contacts may be considered for post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) within 14 days of exposure to an infectious person. They may be offered:
- hepatitis A vaccine
- normal human immunoglobulin (NHIg).
Outbreak response
How public health agencies respond to hepatitis A cases and outbreaks depends on:
- state or territory legislation
- local reporting requirements
- the nature of the outbreak
- available resources.
Effective outbreak control depends on the setting and source of transmission. Below are examples of targeted control measures public health authorities may use for different scenarios.
Cases in food handlers may involve:
- excluding affected food handlers from work until medically cleared
- offering post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) to close contacts within 14 days of exposure
- deep cleaning and disinfecting food preparation areas and utensils
- issuing public alerts, if necessary, to inform consumers and prevent further spread.
Outbreaks in childcare and care-based facilities may involve:
- keeping infected individuals away from others (if possible) until they are no longer infectious
- offering PEP to close contacts within 14 days of exposure
- reinforcing hygiene practices, including supervised handwashing after toileting and before meals
- cleaning and disinfecting of high-touch surfaces and objects (such as toilets, toys, change tables, cutlery)
- communicating with staff and families about symptoms, transmission risks, and the importance of early reporting.
Contamination from widely distributed food products may involve:
- recalling contaminated food products
- issuing national or regional media alerts
- coordinating with Food Standards Australia and New Zealand (FSANZ) and food distributors to trace and investigate supply chains
- offering PEP to individuals who consumed the product within the past 2 weeks
- displaying signage in retail outlets to alert consumers to monitor for symptoms.
In addition, OzFoodNet follows agreed guidelines to undertake multi-jurisdictional foodborne outbreak investigations.
Special situations and high-risk settings
Special situations and high-risk settings might require extra infection and control actions. These include:
- childcare settings
- schools
- hospitals
- work settings
- if the case is a food handler
- locally acquired cases in gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men.
See information about how public health units should respond to these situations.
Resources
See the:
For information relevant to your state or territory, see:
For information on staying safe from hepatitis A while travelling, see:
References
-
1 EC Shin EC and SH Jeong, ‘Natural history, clinical manifestations, and pathogenesis of hepatitis A’,Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 2018, 8(9):a031708, doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a031708.
-
2 WM Lednar, SM Lemon et al., ‘Frequency of illness associated with epidemic hepatitis A virus infections in adults’,American Journal of Epidemiology, 1985, 122(2):226–233, doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a114093.
-
3 EJ Donnan, JE Fielding et al., ‘A multistate outbreak of hepatitis A associated with semidried tomatoes in Australia, 2009’,Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2012, 54(6):775–781, doi:10.1093/cid/cir949.
-
4 C O'Neill, N Franklin et al., ‘Hepatitis A outbreak in Australia linked to imported Medjool dates, June–September 2021’,Communicable Diseases Intelligence, 2022, 46 (October), doi:10.33321/cdi.2022.46.68.
-
5 BL Harney, B Whitton et al., ‘Quantitative evaluation of an integrated nurse model of care providing hepatitis C treatment to people attending homeless services in Melbourne, Australia’,International Journal of Drug Policy, 2019, 72:195–198, doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2019.02.012.
-
6 N Cook, I Bertrand et al., ‘Persistence of hepatitis A virus in fresh produce and production environments, and the effect of disinfection procedures: A review’,Food and Environmental Virology, 2018, 10(3):253–262, doi:10.1007/s12560-018-9349-1.
-
7 D Leblanc, MJ Gagné et al., ‘Persistence of murine norovirus, bovine rotavirus, and hepatitis A virus on stainless steel surfaces, in spring water, and on blueberries’,Food Microbiology, 2019, 84:103257, doi:10.1016/j.fm.2019.103257.
-
8 Y Zhang, X Wang et al., ‘Survival of hepatitis A virus on two-month stored freeze-dried berries’,Journal of Food Protection, 2021, 84(12):2084–2091, doi: 10.4315/jfp-21-110.
-
9 PR Spradling ‘Viral hepatitis’, in DL Heymann (ed), Control of communicable diseases manual, 20th edn, American Public Health Association, Washington, 2015.