About the strategy
The National Health and Climate Strategy sets out how Australia will protect the health of Australians in a changing climate.
The strategy guides action for 5 years, from 2024 to 2028,
It was developed following extensive public consultation including with doctors, nurses, patients and other health professionals.
Why it matters
People in Australia are already experiencing health issues from climate change.
There is an urgent need to address:
- the health and wellbeing impacts of climate change
- the health system’s contribution to climate change.
Acting now helps keep people healthy and reduces costs to the health system.
Objectives and actions
The strategy aims to:
- build a climate-resilient health system
- build a sustainable, high quality, net zero health system
- collaborate internationally to build sustainable, climate-resilient health systems and communities
- guide whole-of-government action towards healthy, climate-resilient and sustainable communities.
The strategy outlines actions in relation to these 4 objectives, as well as in relation to 4 ‘enablers’ of action:
- workforce, leadership and training
- research and innovation
- communication and engagement
- collaboration and governance.
The strategy also emphasises the need to elevate the leadership, wisdom and knowledge of First Nations people in the response to the health impacts of climate change.
Governance
Three governance groups provide advice and support delivery of this strategy:
- the Climate and Health Expert Advisory Group (CHEAG), with climate and health experts from professional, community and sector groups
- the National Climate and Health Program Board, with senior Australian Government officials to oversee the whole-of-government effort to implement the strategy
- the State and Territory Climate and Health Working Group, with climate and health policy leads from state and territory health departments.
These groups enable all levels of government and climate and health stakeholders to work together on implementing the strategy.
Implementation plan and progress
- The National Health and Climate Strategy Implementation Plan 2024 to 2028 outlines a plan for the Australian Government to deliver the 49 actions in the strategy.
- The National Health and Climate Strategy 2024 Implementation Progress Report shows implementation progress of the strategy up to March 2025.