Last updated:
59 results
Search results
-
Australian bat lyssavirus
Australian bat lyssavirus (ABLV) causes a rare but fatal disease. The best prevention is not touching bats. Anyone bitten or scratched by a bat should immediately wash the wound and seek urgent medical attention. -
Australian spotted fever
Australian spotted fever is a rare bacterial infection that spreads to humans through infected ticks, usually found in eastern and southern Australia. It is usually mild. There is no vaccine. The best protection is to prevent tick bites. -
Barmah Forest virus infection
Barmah Forest virus infection is spread by mosquitoes. It is usually not serious, but some people have symptoms for many months. Preventing mosquito bites is the best protection. We support national monitoring of Barmah Forest virus infections. -
Bird flu (avian influenza)
Bird flu mainly spreads to people from infected birds. Infections in people are rare but can be severe. Stay away from sick or dead birds to protect yourself. We support national monitoring and work alongside animal and environmental authorities to help respond to bird flu. -
Botulism
Botulism is a rare disease that affects the nervous system. It can cause death. It most often spreads through contaminated food, soil or dust. Babies under the age of 12 months are most at risk. Good food safety practices are the best protection. We monitor and report on botulism in our community. -
Campylobacteriosis
Campylobacteriosis is a type of bacterial gastroenteritis. It usually spreads to people through contaminated food. It can be serious. Safe food practices and good hygiene are the best protection. We monitor and report on national case numbers and trends. -
Chickenpox (varicella)
Chickenpox is a highly contagious viral infection. It causes an itchy rash and flu-like symptoms. It can be serious. Getting vaccinated is the best protection. We monitor and report on chickenpox in our community, including national case numbers and trends. -
Chikungunya virus infection
Chikungunya virus spreads to humans through bites from infected mosquitoes. It can be serious. The best protection is to prevent mosquito bites. We support national monitoring of chikungunya, including national case numbers and trends. -
Chlamydia (chlamydial infection)
Chlamydia is a sexually transmissible infection (STI). People with chlamydia often don’t have symptoms, but it can be serious if left untreated. Practising safe sex is the best protection, along with regular testing. We monitor chlamydia trends and provide guidelines to reduce risk. -
COVID-19
COVID-19 is a viral respiratory infection that spreads easily between people. It can be serious, especially for older people. The best way to protect yourself is to get vaccinated. The best way to protect others is to stay at home when you are sick. -
Cryptosporidiosis
Cryptosporidiosis is a type of gastroenteritis caused by a parasite. It usually spreads to people through contaminated water and food. Safe food practices and good hygiene are the best protection. We monitor and report on national case numbers and trends. -
Dengue
Dengue is caused by a virus that spreads to people through bites from infected mosquitoes. Preventing mosquito bites is the best protection. We support national monitoring of dengue. We provide guidelines to minimise the risk. -
Diphtheria
Diphtheria is a serious bacterial infection. It most often spreads through respiratory droplets, or direct contact with the wound. Getting vaccinated is the best protection. We monitor and report on national case numbers and trends. We provide guidelines to minimise the risk. -
Donovanosis
Donovanosis is a sexually transmissible infection (STI) that can cause genital and anal ulcers. While rare in Australia, cases continue to be reported in other countries. Safe sex practices and regular sexual health checks are the best protection. -
Ebola virus disease
Ebola virus disease is a severe illness caused by the Ebola virus. About half of people with Ebola die. It spreads through contact with infected blood and body fluids. We monitor the global Ebola situation, including case numbers and trends. -
Flinders Island spotted fever
Flinders Island spotted fever is a bacterial infection that spreads to humans through infected ticks, generally found in southern Australia. It is usually mild, but can cause severe illness or death. There is no vaccine. The best protection is to prevent tick bites. -
Gonorrhoea (gonococcal infection)
Gonorrhoea is a sexually transmissible infection (STI). People with gonorrhoea often have no symptoms but it can be serious if left untreated. Practising safe sex is the best protection, along with regular testing. We monitor gonorrhoea trends and provide guidelines to reduce the risk. -
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) infection
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) is a bacterium that can cause serious disease. It most often spreads through respiratory droplets or respiratory secretions. Getting vaccinated is the best protection. We monitor and report on Hib in our community, including national case numbers and trends. -
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis A is a viral infection of the liver. You can get infected by ingesting food or water contaminated with faeces or contact with an infected person. It can be serious, especially for high-risk groups. Vaccination and good hygiene can protect you. We monitor and report on national case data. -
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B is a highly contagious viral infection. It causes serious liver disease. It spreads through blood and certain body fluids. Vaccination is the best protection. We monitor and report on national case data and trends. We provide strategies to minimise risk. -
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis C is a viral infection of the liver. You can get infected through blood-to-blood contact, such as when sharing needles. It’s treatable but can be serious. We monitor and report on national case data. -
Hepatitis E
Hepatitis E is a viral infection of the liver. It mainly spreads through contaminated food or water. It can be serious. Good hygiene and food safety practices are the best protection. We monitor and report on national case data and trends. -
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) affects the body’s immune system. It is preventable and treatable. Australia’s HIV response is world leading. We monitor and support reporting on national data and trends. We provide guidelines to minimise the risk. -
Influenza (flu)
Influenza (flu) is a common viral infection of the respiratory tract. It most often spreads through respiratory droplets. The best way to protect yourself is to get vaccinated. The best way to protect others is to stay at home when you are sick. -
Invasive group A streptococcal (iGAS) disease
Invasive group A streptococcal disease (iGAS) is a rare but serious bacterial infection. It progresses quickly and can be fatal. We monitor and report on iGAS. We provide guidelines to help minimise risk.