When we think about poor air quality, we often think about the air outside or in big cities. We can forget about the quality of the air inside our own homes that we breathe every day.
With Australians spending most of their time indoors, the air quality inside our homes, offices and other buildings affects our health.
Luckily, there are lots of things you can do to improve your indoor air quality.
We look at some simple ideas that you can consider making to your home’s indoor environment healthier during the winter months.
Top 5 ways to improve indoor air quality in winter
1. Increase the fresh air in your home
During winter, we tend to keep windows closed to retain heat, but this can trap viruses and other pollution in the air inside your home.
Open windows (when the outside air is clean) to allow fresh air to circulate and clean the air in your home.
2. Try to keep your home free from dampness
It’s important to stop moisture from building up inside and mould growing. You can do this by opening windows to bring in clean air.
Other preventative measures include:
- using an exhaust fan in the kitchen when you cook
- making sure your clothes dryer has good ventilation
- turning on the bathroom exhaust fan when showering.
3. Keep the air in your home free from harmful gases and smoke
Some areas of Australia can get very cold at night over winter and are prone to frosty mornings.
If you keep a car in a garage attached to your home, be careful when the car is running. Exhaust from the car can flow into your house and you can end up breathing it in.
Where possible, avoid running your car or vehicle in a garage attached to a dwelling. If it’s not possible to do so, open the outside garage door before starting your car.
Burning wood in open fireplaces or wood heaters can keep your home warm, but it can release harmful pollutants into your home and the homes of your neighbours.
If you have alternative ways to keep warm, try to use them.
If a wood fire is your only option:
- try to minimise its use
- make sure it is well maintained
- burn only dry, seasoned, untreated hardwood
- allow fresh air to enter the room.
4. Use a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter if you have one
HEPA filters work by capturing particles in the air like pollen, mould, bacteria and viruses.
They are used in many appliances including some air purifiers.
If you have a HEPA filter, place it in rooms where you spend the most time and replace the filter regularly.
To pick the best purifier for your home:
- get the right size for the room and where you are going to place it
- choose one with a high-grade filter
- check the noise level of the purifier.
5. Keep dust levels down
A build-up of dust or pet dander on surfaces in your home can reduce the quality of air you breathe.
Dander refers to dead skin cells that are shed by animals that have fur or feathers.
Regularly clean surfaces that could build up dust easily, like:
- floors, carpets and rugs
- bookshelves
- appliances you don’t use often
- the top of cabinets
- windowsills.
You can also help reduce the amount of dust in your home by using an air purifier – if you have one – and changing its filter regularly.
Learn more
Read more about indoor air quality and how it can impact your health.