Stay cool
In the summer heat, dangerous illnesses like heatstroke and heat stress can sneak up fast.
Stay cool in the heat:
- Drink plenty of water, and avoid drinks that can dehydrate you, like soft drinks, alcohol, tea, coffee, and other sweetened or caffeinated drinks.
- Wrap crushed ice in a damp towel and place it on your neck and chest to help cool your body down.
- Wear loose, lightweight clothing to help your body stay cool and limit sweating.
- Limit physical activity, especially outdoors, and take regular 10-minute breaks to lower your body temperature.
Mild symptoms like cramps, thirst, fatigue, headache, or rash can be warning signs of a bigger issue. Severe symptoms can be life-threatening.
Heatstroke is a medical emergency. Seek medical attention immediately if you experience:
- hot, dry skin
- sudden rises in body temperature
- dehydration and intense thirst
- rapid pulse and breathing
- nausea and vomiting
- unusual behaviour, confusion and slurred speech
- loss of consciousness, seizures or coma.
If you or someone else experiences symptoms of heatstroke call 000 immediately.
While you are waiting for emergency treatment, take steps to lower the affected person’s temperature by:
- moving into the shade
- spraying them with cool water
- applying ice packs.
Keep an eye on your neighbours, friends and family – some people are at a higher risk of heat-related illness, including:
- older people
- babies and children
- people with existing health conditions
- people who work outdoors.
Read more about avoiding heat-related illnesses and what to do if someone has heatstroke.
Eat safe
Food poisoning is more common in summer when hot weather makes it hard to keep food at safe temperatures.
Foods including dairy products, eggs and mayonnaise made with raw eggs, seafood, raw fruits and vegetables, and raw or cold meats are especially risky.
Eat safely even on hot days:
- Store high-risk foods below 5 °C or in an esky with ice packs.
- Don’t leave food at room temperature for more than 2 hours – put it in the fridge.
- Cook food thoroughly, especially meat, seafood, and eggs.
- Wash fruits and vegetables before eating.
- Keep raw and cooked or ready-to-eat foods separate.
- Clean your hands, surfaces and utensils regularly.
- Make sure you have enough fridge and rubbish bin space.
- Don’t prepare food for others if you are unwell.
Handling food safely is especially important for those at higher risk of getting very sick from food poisoning, including:
- children
- older people
- pregnant people
- people with existing health conditions.
Read more about avoiding food-related illnesses.