Most people who get a viral respiratory infection – like a cold, the flu, RSV or COVID-19 – will get better without treatment within 7 to 10 days.
If you’re at risk of severe illness, your healthcare professional might prescribe antiviral medicines.
But antibiotics do not work against the viruses that cause these illnesses. They only fight bacteria.
Taking antibiotics when you don’t need them can lead to unnecessary and avoidable side effects and increase the risk of antimicrobial resistance (AMR).
AMR is one of the biggest threats to human and animal health today.
It occurs when microorganisms (like bacteria) become resistant to the effects of the medicines used to treat them. They become difficult – and sometimes impossible – to treat.
Resistant infections are already causing some deaths. In a worst-case scenario there would be no effective antibiotics left to treat infections.
We can cut down on antibiotic use by preventing infections spreading in the first place.
You can protect yourself and others from viral respiratory infections by:
- getting vaccinated against the flu every year
- staying home if you are sick with cold and flu symptoms, and wearing a mask if you need to leave home
- putting physical distance between yourself and others
- regularly washing your hands
- coughing and sneezing into a tissue or your elbow and throwing the tissue in the bin
- avoiding touching your eyes, nose and mouth, particularly if you are around people who are unwell
- regularly cleaning objects and surfaces you use often, such as mobile phones and door handles.
If you have a viral respiratory infection, you can ease your symptoms by:
- getting plenty of rest
- drinking plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration
- taking paracetamol, ibuprofen or other over-the-counter medicines to ease pain or fever – and always following the instructions on the packet.
If you remain unwell or if your symptoms, like fever, get worse, healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a healthcare professional to arrange testing and treatment.
This may include antibiotics, if appropriate, based on your healthcare professional’s clinical assessment.