At a glance
- No vaccine available – read more about prevention
- Nationally notifiable disease
About leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is a disease caused by Leptospira bacteria.
Leptospirosis usually spreads to people through contact with freshwater or soil contaminated with urine from infected animals.
Why it matters to public health
About 100 to 200 people are usually diagnosed with leptospirosis in Australia every year.
Most infections are mild, but it can be serious, especially for certain groups.
Leptospirosis can occur across Australia but is more common in humid or tropical areas.
Outbreaks can also occur, especially after floods and cyclones.
Because of these impacts, we:
- work with colleagues in the animal and environmental sectors to ensure a One Health coordinated approach to monitoring and reporting of leptospirosis
- plan for how to manage outbreaks.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Some people do not develop any symptoms or get only mild symptoms.
Common early symptoms often start suddenly and can include:
- fever and chills
- headache
- sore muscles (particularly of the calves, thighs and lower back)
- red eyes.
Some people progress to more serious disease after about 7 days which can result in inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) and its lining (meningitis).
About 1 in 10 people, may develop Weil’s syndrome, a serious illness that can include:
- jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes)
- kidney failure
- bleeding
- inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis)
- inflammation lining of the brain (meningitis)
- bleeding in the lungs and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
The illness can last a few days to a month. Without treatment, recovery can take longer.
Read more about the symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of leptospirosis.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start between 5 and 14 days after getting infected. But this can range from 2 to 30 days.
How it spreads
The bacteria that cause leptospirosis are found in many animals, including:
- rodents (rats and mice)
- livestock (cattle and pigs)
- horses
- dogs.
It can spread to people from infected animals through:
- direct contact with urine
- contact with soil or water that contains urine – such as floodwater, ponds, rivers or containers of water
- drinking water or eating food that has been contaminated with animal urine.
The bacteria can enter a person’s body:
- through an open wound, including cuts and abrasions
- through the eyes, nose or mouth
- by inhaling contaminated dust or aerosolised urine or water.
People can get leptospirosis more than once.
Infectious period
Leptospirosis does not usually spread between people.
Prevention
There is no human vaccine for leptospirosis.
The best ways to protect against leptospirosis are to:
- avoid contact with floodwater
- cover any open wounds or abrasions with a waterproof dressing
- wash hands often, especially when around animals or outdoors
- not drink untreated water from lakes, rivers or ponds
- control rodent populations around homes and workplaces
- wear enclosed shoes and gloves while gardening or working outside
- vaccinate dogs and cattle against leptospirosis.
People who might be at greater risk of exposure through their jobs should follow their workplace’s occupational health and safety advice. This might include extra prevention steps, such as:
- wearing appropriate personal protective equipment
- showering after work.
Read more ways to prevent leptospirosis.
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting leptospirosis or getting very sick from it.
The bacteria are found throughout Australia, but are much more common in warm, humid regions. People in these areas might be more at risk.
In warm areas, Leptospira can survive in freshwater and wet soil for months. Heavy rainfall and flooding can increase the risk to people, because animal urine can contaminate floodwaters.
People at greater risk of severe disease
Leptospirosis might pose a greater risk of severe illness for:
- pregnant people
- people with some chronic conditions
- older people.
People at greater risk of exposure
People might at greater risk of exposure to the bacteria if:
- their job involves animals, soil or water, such as:
- farmers
- abattoir workers
- fish workers
- veterinarians and vet nurses
- laboratory professionals handling clinical specimens
- sewerage workers
- miners
- military personnel
- they participate in outdoor activities, such as
- swimming
- other freshwater sports, such as kayaking and whitewater rafting
- camping
- hiking
- fishing
- gardening
- they travel to places where leptospirosis is more common, especially after heavy rainfall or flooding
- they have an open wound, such as a cut or abrasion that is exposed to animals, soil or water.
Diagnosis and treatment
Leptospirosis is usually diagnosed through laboratory testing of:
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Leptospirosis can be treated with antibiotics. People who develop serious symptoms or complications might need hospital care.
Read more about how to manage or treat leptospirosis.
Surveillance and reporting
Leptospirosis is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new laboratory confirmed and probable cases to us daily through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
We take a One Health approach to the surveillance and monitoring of leptospirosis. As well as human disease surveillance, we work with government agencies for agriculture and the environment, to understand and address the impacts of leptospirosis in animals.
This is part of our surveillance activities, which help us monitor case numbers around the country and understand disease patterns.
We analyse the data and report on case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
Outbreaks
Outbreaks usually occur after heavy rain or flooding in places where leptospirosis is common. Outbreaks might be more likely in communities with poor housing and sanitation.
States and territories have different definitions of outbreaks and different public health responses.
Outbreak response measures might include:
- identifying the source of infection
- educating people about leptospirosis and how to prevent it
- draining, cleaning up or restricting access to contaminated water bodies
- raising awareness for health professionals, especially after cyclones or floods
- other measures to reduce the risk, such as rodent control.
Read more about how the Australian Government defines and plans for outbreaks.
Support
For information about leptospirosis in your state or territory, see:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.