At a glance
- No vaccine available – read more about prevention
- Nationally notifiable disease
About HIV
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) affects the body’s immune system. It reduces the number of CD4+T cells, a type of white blood cell which has an important role in immunity.
It is a treatable chronic condition. People who get effective HIV treatment can live long, healthy lives and not transmit the virus to others.
People with HIV who don’t get treatment can develop severe illness. When this happens, the immune system is weakened, making it difficult for the body to fight infections and certain cancers. This is also referred to as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
In Australia, very few people develop severe HIV-related illness, and the term AIDS is not commonly used.
Why it matters to public health
Australia’s HIV response is world leading. But HIV remains an important public health issue. More than 30,000 people in Australia live with HIV.
From 2015 to 2024, the number of new HIV infections diagnosed each year reduced by 27% because of testing, treatment, and prevention programs.
We are working towards virtually eliminating HIV transmission by 2030. But HIV continues to disproportionately affect certain groups in Australia.
Globally, it remains a major public health challenge, especially in regions with limited access to medicines and health care.
To further reduce HIV transmission in Australia, we promote and support equitable access to prevention, testing and care.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Some people with HIV might have an influenza-like illness soon after getting infected.
Common early symptoms include:
- fever
- fatigue
- headache
- sore muscles and joints
- sore throat
- swollen glands in the neck, armpits, or groin
- rash.
These symptoms usually end within a few weeks.
If untreated, HIV eventually leads to a severely weakened immune system and severe illness.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Onset of symptoms
Early mild symptoms of HIV might appear 2 to 4 weeks after infection.
If untreated, serious complications will usually appear within 10 years.
How it spreads
HIV spreads through body fluids. These include:
- blood
- semen
- vaginal fluids
- rectal fluids
- breast milk.
It can be passed on through:
- unprotected sex, including vaginal, anal, and oral sexual contact
- sharing drug-injecting equipment
- unsterile piercing or tattoo equipment.
It can also be passed from parent to child during pregnancy, birth or breastfeeding.
HIV cannot be passed on by:
- saliva (including kissing)
- touching
- hugging
- shaking hands
- sharing food and utensils
- using the same toilets.
Infectious period
People with untreated HIV can pass on the virus to others throughout their lifetime.
People who are effectively treated can get to a point where the virus can’t be detected in the blood and can’t be passed on. This is known as U=U (undetectable = untransmissible).
Prevention
If you think you have been exposed to HIV, speak with your healthcare professional as soon as possible.
There are medicines (called post-exposure prophylaxis or PEP) that can reduce your risk of getting HIV if you start taking them within 3 days. These work best if started within 1 day of an exposure.
The best ways to protect yourself and others against HIV are to:
- practise safe sex – including using condoms and dental dams
- speak to your healthcare professional about HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) if you think you might be at risk of getting HIV – PrEP is prescribed for some people to reduce the risk of getting HIV
- never share needles, syringes or other injecting equipment
- ensure sterile equipment for body piercing, tattoos or cosmetic procedures
- get tested regularly for HIV and other sexually transmissible infections (STIs)
- take your medicine as prescribed, if you have HIV, to help avoid passing it on.
Transmission of HIV from a pregnant person to their baby is very rare in Australia. But effective treatment and working with a healthcare professional to plan the birth and baby feeding can minimise the risk.
Read about more ways to:
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting HIV or getting very sick from it.
If you are at greater risk, it is especially important to take steps to protect yourself.
People at greater risk of severe disease
HIV poses a greater risk of severe illness for people who do not receive timely and effective treatment.
This can include people who experience barriers such as:
- stigma and discrimination
- limited access to health services
- living in areas where services are harder to reach.
People at greater risk of exposure
HIV disproportionately impacts certain populations, including:
- gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men
- people from culturally and linguistically diverse populations
- people born overseas
- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
- sex workers
- people who inject drugs and share needles or other unsterile injecting equipment
- trans and gender diverse people
- people in custodial settings and detention centres
- people who have received a blood transfusion in a country with an unsafe blood supply – blood donation is strictly regulated and safe in Australia.
People who have an STI might be at greater risk of getting HIV if they are exposed to the virus during sexual contact.
Diagnosis and treatment
Getting tested for HIV is easy, private, and important for health. People can get tested for HIV by:
- purchasing a self-test kit, available at some pharmacies
- ordering a free test online from HIV Self-Testing Australia
- seeing a healthcare professional and asking for a test during a regular appointment
- going to a sexual health clinic or community health centre – HIV testing is often free or low-cost.
It takes time after an exposure for tests to detect HIV. A healthcare professional can provide advice about HIV testing.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
HIV is treated with antiretroviral therapy (ART).
HIV treatment stops the virus multiplying in the body. People living with HIV can live healthy and long lives by taking medication in line with their treatment plan.
Proper treatment can prevent people with HIV from passing on the virus.
Read more about how to manage or treat HIV.
Surveillance and reporting
HIV is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
The Kirby Institute undertakes national HIV surveillance and reporting.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new confirmed HIV cases to the Kirby Institute confidentially. We do not receive any personal HIV data directly.
We work closely with the Kirby Institute to understand current HIV epidemiology in Australia.
Support
If you have just been diagnosed with HIV, there are confidential, free, and non-judgemental support services available across Australia. These can help you understand your diagnosis, connect with others, and access care.
Peer Navigators are people living with HIV who are trained to provide one-on-one support. They can answer questions and help you navigate health and social services. Peer support is available in every state and territory.
For more information about HIV, see:
- Anwernekenhe National HIV Alliance (ANA)
- Australian Injecting and Illicit Drug Users League (AIVL)
- Ending HIV
- Health Equity Matters
- National Association of People with HIV Australia
- Scarlet Alliance, Australian Sex Worker Association.
For information about HIV in your state or territory, see:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.