At a glance
About hepatitis C
Hepatitis C is a liver infection caused by the hepatitis C virus, which spreads when the blood of an infected person enters the bloodstream of another.
Most people don’t get any symptoms when first infected with hepatitis C, so might not seek health care.
Without treatment, most people go on to develop a chronic infection, which can cause serious liver disease over time.
Why it matters to public health
Hepatitis C is serious disease that can lead to liver damage, cirrhosis and liver cancer.
Every year, thousands of Australians are diagnosed with hepatitis C. In 2024 alone, nearly 7,500 people were diagnosed.
Close to 70,000 Australians live with chronic hepatitis C, and almost 1 in 5 are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Hepatitis C can be cured with effective treatment. Due to sustained public health efforts and improved access to treatment, infection rates have been falling rapidly since 2016.
To reach Australia’s goal of eliminating hepatitis C as a public health threat by 2030, more work is needed.
Because of these major impacts, we:
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Most people with acute hepatitis C don’t have any symptoms. Only about 1 in 3 have symptoms, which include:
About 1 in 3 people with hepatitis C recover without treatment. But most people develop chronic hepatitis C (that is, infection lasting more than 6 months) if they are not treated.
People with chronic hepatitis C also have no symptoms until the liver is damaged.
Serious complications of chronic hepatitis C include:
Read more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis C.
Healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Check your symptoms
Onset of symptoms
If symptoms of acute hepatitis C infection appear, they usually start between 2 and 26 weeks after infection.
Symptoms of liver damage from chronic hepatitis C can take many years to develop, often going unnoticed until serious illness occurs.
How it spreads
Hepatitis C virus spreads through blood-to-blood contact.
In Australia, about 8 out of 10 new cases of hepatitis C result from injecting drugs.
Transmission can also occur:
- through contaminated tattoo or body piercing equipment
- during sexual contact, especially for men who have sex with men or people living with HIV
- by sharing personal care items, such as razors and toothbrushes
- during birth (pregnant person to baby)
- through exposure to infected blood in healthcare settings.
In the past, unscreened blood products presented a risk of transmitting hepatitis C. But Australia has screened blood since the early 1990s, so the risk in Australia is extremely low.
Having had hepatitis C in the past does not mean you are immune. You can be reinfected if exposed to the virus again.
You can’t get hepatitis C from:
- kissing
- touching
- sharing food.
Infectious period
People with acute hepatitis C become infectious 2 to 14 days after being infected. They remain infectious until the infection is either:
- cleared by the body
- cured through antiviral treatment.
People living with chronic hepatitis C are almost always infectious for their lifetime, unless cured with antiviral treatment.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against hepatitis C.
The best way to protect yourself is to:
- never share needles, syringes or other equipment
- always use sterile equipment
- when injecting medication or drugs, including performance enhancing substances
- for body piercing, tattoos or cosmetic procedures
- not share items such as razors, toothbrushes or other personal items
- use barrier methods such as condoms during sex
- get tested during pregnancy, especially if you are at higher risk of exposure.
Read more about ways to prevent hepatitis C.
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting hepatitis C or getting very sick from it. If you are at greater risk, it is especially important to take steps to protect yourself.
Hepatitis C disproportionately affects Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. This is driven by the enduring impacts of colonisation, racism and inequity that have led to higher infection risk and barriers to culturally safe care.
People at greater risk of severe disease
Hepatitis C poses a greater risk of severe illness for people living with:
People at greater risk of exposure
People who inject drugs, or did so in the past, are at greatest risk of hepatitis C infection.
Other people at greater risk include those who are, or have ever been:
- in custodial facilities
- recipients of body piercings, tattoos, cosmetic treatments or medical procedures with unsterile equipment
- born to someone living with hepatitis C
- intimate partners of people living with hepatitis C – especially men who have sex with men or people living with HIV
- recipients of a blood transfusion or organ transplant before 1990 (or more recently in some low- or middle-income countries)
- recipients of certain plasma-derived clotting treatments for bleeding disorders before 1993 (or more recently in some low- or middle-income countries)
- affected by a needlestick injury.
Getting tested is important if you have ever been in a high-risk group, even if it’s no longer the case. This is because you could have a chronic infection from past exposure and not know it.
Diagnosis and treatment
Your healthcare professional will refer you for blood tests to diagnose hepatitis C.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Find a health service
Your doctor will prescribe oral antiviral treatment for 8 to 12 weeks.
Read more about hepatitis C treatment.
Surveillance and reporting
Hepatitis C is a nationally notifiable disease. These are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new cases to us daily through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
This is part of our surveillance activities, which help us monitor case numbers around the country and understand disease patterns.
We analyse the data and report on case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool. You can use the tool to filter and search the latest information.
Outbreaks
How public health authorities respond to hepatitis C cases and outbreaks depends on:
- state or territory legislation
- local reporting requirements
- the nature of the cases or outbreak
- available resources.
Hepatitis C preparedness and response initiatives include:
- co-designing prevention and treatment strategies with local communities and health services
- tailoring public health education and messaging about prevention and treatment for people at high risk
- enabling access to appropriate prevention (for example, needle and syringe programs), testing and treatment services.
Read more about how the Australian Government defines and plans for outbreaks and pandemics.
Support
For more information about hepatitis C see:
For information about hepatitis C in your state or territory see:
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.
Quick links
Disease
Infectious agent
Hepatitis C is caused by the hepatitis C virus, which belongs to the Flaviviridae family.
Hepatitis C virus primarily infects hepatocytes (liver cells), leading to both acute and chronic liver inflammation.
The virus has high genetic variability, with at least 8 genotypes and many subtypes that can influence disease progression and treatment response.
Clinical presentation
Most people with acute hepatitis C are asymptomatic.[1][2]
Up to 1 in 3 patients have symptoms, which typically include:
About 1 in 3 people with acute hepatitis C infection recover without treatment.[3]
Most people with untreated acute infection develop chronic hepatitis C – that is, infection lasting more than 6 months.
Chronic hepatitis C is asymptomatic until the liver is damaged, which can take many years.
Serious complications of hepatitis C include:
Hepatitis C infections can be cured by antiviral medications.
Read more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis C.
Public health importance
Australia is seeking to eliminate hepatitis C as a public health threat by 2030.
Hepatitis C is a major public health issue globally and in Australia. It is a major contributor to chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer).
Hepatitis C disproportionately affects certain population groups who are more likely to be exposed to the virus or face barriers to timely diagnosis and treatment. These barriers include:
- stigma
- discrimination
- limited access to culturally safe care.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are particularly impacted due to enduring effects of colonisation, racism and inequity.
Because of these major impacts, we:
Epidemiology
Hepatitis C diagnoses in Australia have declined substantially since the introduction of effective treatment.
From 2015 to 2024, hepatitis C notifications reduced by 38%[4] due to:
- public health actions
- more effective treatment with fewer side effects, since 2014
- universal access to the improved treatment through the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme, since 2016.
Despite these efforts, in Australia:
- 7,405 hepatitis C infections were notified in 2024, with almost three-quarters (71%) in males
- an estimated 68,890 people were living with chronic hepatitis C at the end of 2023.[5]
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people – particularly young men – are disproportionately affected.[6][7]
At the end of 2020, about 18% of Australians living with chronic hepatitis C were Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.[6]
Hepatitis C rates are typically higher in people living in regional areas than major cities.
For the latest information on hepatitis C incidence, severity, transmission and virology in Australia, see the:
Spread of infection
Transmission
Hepatitis C virus is transmitted through blood-to-blood contact.[8]
In Australia, transmission most commonly occurs through contaminated injecting drug equipment – including needles and syringes.[2]
Transmission can also occur through:
- contaminated tattoo or body piercing equipment
- vertical transmission
- sexual contact, especially for men who have sex with men
- shared personal items – such as razors and toothbrushes
- exposure to infected blood in healthcare settings.
In the past, unscreened organ transplants or blood products presented a risk of transmitting hepatitis C. But the risk in Australia has been very low since screening started in the early 1990s.
Hepatitis C infection does not lead to immunity. A person who clears the infection or has been successfully treated, can be reinfected if exposed to the virus again.
Incubation period
Symptoms usually start between 2 and 26 weeks after exposure to the virus.[8]
Infectious period
People are considered infectious from when hepatitis C virus RNA is detectable in blood – between 2 and 14 days following exposure[2] – until the infection is either:
- cleared by the body
- cured through antiviral treatment.
Priority populations
People at greater risk of severe disease
Hepatitis C poses a greater risk of severe disease for people living with:
Read more about:
People at greater risk of exposure
People who inject drugs – or did so in the past – are at greatest risk of hepatitis C infection.[2]
Other people at higher risk include those who are, or have ever been:
- in custodial settings
- recipients of body piercings, tattoos, cosmetic treatments or medical procedures with unsterile equipment
- born to someone living with hepatitis C
- intimate partners of people living with hepatitis C – especially men who have sex with men or people living with HIV
- recipients of a blood transfusion or organ transplant before 1990[2] or more recently in some low- or middle-income countries
- recipients of specific plasma-derived clotting products for a coagulation disorder before 1993[2] or more recently in some low- or middle-income countries
- affected by a needlestick injury.
Anyone previously exposed to hepatitis C might have a chronic infection and would benefit from testing.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are a key priority population for hepatitis C elimination due to systemic risk factors for hepatitis C exposure and persistent barriers to accessing culturally safe care.
Read more about:
Setting at increased risk of spread
Custodial settings are a primary site of hepatitis C transmission in Australia.
Read more about:
Prevention
There is no vaccine against hepatitis C.
Hepatitis C can be prevented by avoiding contact with infected blood.
Prevention measures include:
- using sterile equipment
- when injecting medication or drugs
- for body piercing, tattoos or cosmetic procedures
- not sharing personal items like razors and toothbrushes
- using safe sex practices – for example, condoms during sex
- testing during pregnancy, especially for pregnant people at higher risk of exposure
- maintaining infection prevention and control measures in healthcare settings.
Australia has implemented rigorous screening of donated blood and tissues.
Read more about how to prevent hepatitis C.
Prevention among priority populations
Strategies to prevent acute and chronic hepatitis C infection among priority populations include:
- testing people at greater risk of exposure and treating those who test positive for hepatitis C
- providing access to harm reduction for people who inject drugs, including needle and syringe programs, opioid agonist treatment and peer education
- running education and awareness activities developed in consultation with priority populations
- supporting peer workforces to promote prevention, testing and treatment
- working to reduce stigma, racism, and discrimination.
Read more about priority populations in our national strategy.
Diagnosis and clinical management
Diagnosis
Hepatitis C is usually diagnosed through laboratory testing. Hepatitis C serology requires a blood sample.
If the serology test is positive for hepatitis C antibodies, nucleic acid amplification testing (such as polymerase chain reaction or PCR) of the blood sample will be used to confirm current infection.
Point-of-care tests are available for hepatitis C in some healthcare settings. They may detect either hepatitis C antibodies or RNA using blood finger-prick samples.
Additional genotype testing may be done to investigate reinfection or to guide care.
For more information go to:
Laboratory case definition
The Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) has developed standard case definitions for the diagnosis of key diseases in Australia. This document contains the laboratory case definition for hepatitis C.
Clinical management
Hepatitis C is treated with antiviral medications. Follow-up testing of a blood sample for hepatitis C RNA should be done at least 12 weeks after treatment to confirm cure (successful viral eradication).
People with cirrhosis need long-term monitoring after successful viral eradication to screen for other complications, such as hepatocellular carcinoma.
Successful treatment of previous hepatitis C infection does not protect against reinfection.
Read more about the clinical management of hepatitis C.
Notification and reporting
Surveillance case definition
The Communicable Diseases Network Australia has published surveillance case definitions that explain the national criteria for classification as confirmed:
National notification and reporting
Hepatitis C is a nationally notifiable disease. This means certain health professionals must report diagnoses through their relevant health authorities.
Check how to report laboratory-confirmed newly acquired or unspecified hepatitis C cases or related deaths in your state or territory:
State and territory health authorities report new cases to us daily through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, as part of our surveillance activities.
We report case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
This helps us to:
- identify trends in hepatitis C activity and spread
- plan and allocate resources
- assess the impact of control programs
- develop policies to minimise the impact of hepatitis C.
Public health response
National public health guidelines
These guidelines for Public Health Units provide nationally consistent guidance on how to respond to hepatitis C. They are part of a Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs) published by the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA).
Management of cases
Case management focuses on:
- identifying the likely source of infection
- identifying any contacts or co-exposed individuals
- preventing transmission and reinfection.
People with hepatitis C should be:
People with hepatitis C typically do not need to isolate. Some people may have work restrictions depending on their role and work setting.
Read more about:
Contacts are not required to quarantine.
Contact tracing is done to:
- identify people who may have been exposed to hepatitis C
- test contacts for infection
- provide advice and public health education.
The extent of contact tracing will depend on the duration and likely source of infection.
Outbreak response
How public health authorities respond to hepatitis C cases and outbreaks depends on:
- state or territory legislation
- local reporting requirements
- the nature of the cases or outbreak
- available resources.
Hepatitis C preparedness and response initiatives include:
- engaging early and establishing trust with local community and health services – including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled health organisations
- co-designing hepatitis C prevention strategies with communities
- tailoring public health education and messaging to at-risk people and health professionals
- enabling access to appropriate harm reduction, testing and treatment services
- establishing effective pathways for collaboration with custodial health services.
Special situations and high-risk settings
Special situations, priority populations and high-risk settings might require extra investigation and public health actions.
Resources
For more information go to:
References
-
1 M Fasano, F Ieva et al., ‘Acute hepatitis C: Current status and future perspectives’, Viruses, 2024, 16(11):1739, doi:10.3390/v16111739.
-
2 Gastroenterological Society of Australia, ‘Australian recommendations for the management of hepatitis C virus infection: A consensus statement 2022’, October 2022, accessed 31 July 2025.
-
3 DN Aisyah, L Shallcross et al., ‘Assessing hepatitis C spontaneous clearance and understanding associated factors: A systematic review and meta-analysis’, Journal of Viral Hepatitis, 2018, 25(6):680–698, doi:10.1111/jvh.12866.
-
4 Kirby Institute, ‘Hepatitis C data’, September 2025, accessed 16 September 2025.
-
5 J King, J Kwon et al., 'HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmissible infections in Australia: Annual surveillance report 2024 – Hepatitis C',accessed 30 July 2025.
-
6 Kirby Institute, ‘Progress towards hepatitis C elimination among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Australia: Monitoring and evaluation report’, accessed 16 September 2025.
-
7 E Naruka, J King et al., ‘Bloodborne viral and sexually transmissible infections in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples: Annual surveillance report 2024’, accessed 16 September 2025.
-
8 CW Spearman, GM Dusheiko et al., ‘Hepatitis C’, The Lancet, 2019, 394(10207):1451–1466, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(19)32320-7.