Why it’s important
Most people will not experience health problems from mould. But exposure to spores released by some moulds can cause serious health conditions.
When mould grows and spreads indoors, it can release spores that may:
- trigger allergic reactions – like asthma and eczema
- irritate your nose, eyes, throat and skin
- cause respiratory infections.
In serious cases, prolonged exposure to spores can cause serious, chronic illnesses like hypersensitivity pneumonitis (lung inflammation).
If you feel unwell or are concerned about any symptoms you are experiencing, seek medical advice. In the case of an emergency, phone 000.
People at greater risk
Those most likely to be affected are people who:
- have weakened immune systems
- have allergies
- have severe asthma
- have lung diseases – like Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
- are pregnant.
Preventing mould
Mould needs moisture and nutrients to grow. To prevent it, keep your spaces well-ventilated, clean and dry by:
- opening windows and doors when the weather permits and the outdoor air is clean
- using exhaust fans in your kitchen and bathrooms
- putting the lids on pots and pans when cooking
- ventilating your laundry well when running the washer or dryer
- hanging wet clothes outside
- avoiding the use of humidifiers
- limiting or regularly cleaning bodies of water and moisture like pet bowls, fish tanks and indoor plants
- keeping your gutters clear
- fixing leaks, plumbing problems, roofs and other building faults that can create dampness
- wiping up spills
- keeping your bathroom, kitchen and laundry clean and dry
- completely cleaning or disposing of water damaged materials
- disposing of mouldy food – and properly cleaning any surfaces it has touched.
Removing mould
Personal protective equipment
If you have decided to remove mould yourself, ensure good ventilation and wear protective clothing, like:
- an N95 or P2 respirator mask
- gloves
- eye protection
- a shower cap
- overalls
- suitable footwear.
Removal
If there is mould in your home, address it as soon as you notice it:
- Regularly clean mould-prone surfaces with a household detergent or white vinegar diluted in water (4 parts vinegar to 1 part water).
- For harder to remove mould, use bleach diluted in water (1 part bleach to 3 parts water) – always follow the label.
- Don’t mix cleaning products – they can create toxic fumes.
- Scrub the mouldy area and about 50 cm around it (as not all mould is visible) with a microfibre cloth – regularly rinse it in clean water to prevent the mould spreading.
- Don’t use a dry brush – it can flick spores to other areas.
- Dry the surface completely after cleaning.
- Have contaminated rugs, carpets, and mattresses professionally cleaned, or replace them.
It’s important to address the root cause of the problem, not just what is visible – mould can grow back.
If you are unsure or cannot safely remove the mould yourself, seek professional help from a mould removal or remediation specialist or occupational hygienist.
More information
Read more on mould and spore exposure:
- in the state and territory resources on mould
- in the enHealth guidance – Potential health effects of mould in the environment
- in the Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care’s Biotoxins (indoor damp and mould) Clinical Pathway
- at Lung Foundation Australia.