Current status
There has been a resurgence of measles around the world since 2022 post-pandemic, with outbreaks currently in multiple countries, including those frequently travelled by Australians.
This means a higher risk of measles entering Australia from overseas.
Measles is highly infectious. To achieve herd immunity for measles, Australia needs a vaccination coverage rate of about 92% to 94%.
Although vaccination remains high in Australia, it has decreased since the COVID-19 pandemic. Vaccination coverage for measles, mumps and rubella remains below the World Health Organization’s target rate of 95%. This means more people are at risk.
In 2024, there were 56 cases of measles in Australia, compared with 26 in 2023 and 284 in 2019.
Of the 2024 cases:
- 37 caught measles overseas, 14 of them from South-East Asia including:
- 7 from Vietnam
- 2 from Indonesia
- 2 from Malaysia
- 2 from Thailand
- 1 from Cambodia
- 19 caught measles in Australia with known links to infected travellers.
Protecting yourself and others
Measles can cause severe complications, especially for infants and young children. It is almost entirely preventable through vaccination.
The vaccine is free for children, with doses scheduled at 12 months and 18 months of age.
Free catch-up vaccine doses are also available for older children who missed their vaccine doses. Infants can get an early dose as young as 6 months if they are travelling to countries where:
- measles is common
- there is a measles outbreak.
Measles-containing vaccine is recommended for:
- children aged 12 months or over
- adolescents and adults born during or since 1966 who have not received 2 doses of measles-containing vaccine, particularly
- healthcare workers
- childhood educators and carers
- people who work in long-term care facilities
- people who work in correctional facilities
- travellers.
Check your vaccination status online or with your general practitioner.
Before travelling internationally, check whether you or your children need early vaccine doses and are up-to-date.
Symptoms
After travelling, keep a lookout for symptoms of measles for up to 18 days. Symptoms may include:
- fever
- general fatigue and illness
- runny nose
- dry cough
- sore and red eyes (conjunctivitis)
- rash that first appears on the face and hairline, then spreads to the body
- red and bluish spots inside the mouth (Koplik's spots).
If you think you have measles
If you think you or your family have been infected with measles, avoid public places and seek immediate medical care.
Call your doctor, medical practitioner or hospital ahead to let them know you suspect measles (so that you can be isolated), and wear a mask when you go.
Learn more
Read more about measles.