Last updated:
Filter results
You can narrow down the results using the filters
Audience
Content type
Topic
540 results
Search results
-
PHLN information for pathology services on diphtheria
This Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) information about an ongoing outbreak of diphtheria is for clinical microbiology laboratories and pathology services. It outlines when to identify and test for Corynebacterium diphtheriae and the need for timely reporting to public health authorities. -
Diphtheria in Australia – Epidemiological update – 27 April 2026
This report provides information about the epidemiology of diphtheria in Australia. -
Review of interventions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from health system waste
This report examines how reducing health system waste cuts greenhouse gas emissions. It reviews 53 interventions, 107 studies and 15 case studies, showing that prioritising reduce and reuse actions can significantly decarbonise Australia’s health system. -
National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) fortnightly reports – 30 March to 12 April 2026
This report and accompanying table provide a fortnightly summary on notifications of Australia's nationally notifiable diseases for 30 March to 12 April 2026. -
CDNA Interim guidance for diphtheria outbreak management
Interim guidance for state and territory public health units outlining key response actions and principles for interventions during outbreaks of diphtheria. -
Diphtheria in Australia – Epidemiological update – 20 April 2026
This report provides information about the epidemiology of diphtheria in Australia. -
Australian Respiratory Surveillance Report – 6 April 2026 to 19 April 2026
This Australian Respiratory Surveillance Report (ARSR) includes information about acute respiratory illnesses including COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus. -
Job application kit – EL2 – Director Pandemic Preparedness and Biosecurity Job Ref (26CDC-PB-10088)
This is the job application kit for the EL2 – Director Pandemic Preparedness and Biosecurity Job Ref (26CDC-PB-10088) role. -
Job application kit – EL2 – Director One Health Job Ref (26CDC-OHCEB-10087)
This is the job application kit for the EL2 – Director One Health Job Ref (26CDC-OHCEB-10087) role. -
Job application form
This is the interactive application form to be used when applying for a job with us. -
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework for the National Immunisation Strategy for Australia 2025–2030
This framework provides high-level guidance for how the National Immunisation Strategy for Australia 2025–2030 will be monitored and evaluated and the learnings shared. -
Diphtheria in Australia – Epidemiological update – 14 April 2026
This report provides information about the epidemiology of diphtheria in Australia. -
Diphtheria in Australia – Epidemiological updates
This collection contains reports with information about the epidemiology of diphtheria in Australia. -
Job application kit - MO6 – Chief Medical Advisor – Office of the Director General (26CDC-CMA-10089)
This is the job application kit for the MO6 – Chief Medical Advisor – Office of the Director General (26CDC-CMA-10089) role. -
Viral haemorrhagic fever – Laboratory case definition
The Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) has developed standard case definitions for the diagnosis of key diseases in Australia. This document contains the laboratory case definition for viral haemorrhagic fever. -
National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) fortnightly reports – 16 to 29 March 2026
This report and accompanying table provide a fortnightly summary on notifications of Australia's nationally notifiable diseases for 16 to 29 March 2026. -
National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) fortnightly reports – 2 to 15 March 2026
This report and accompanying table provide a fortnightly summary on notifications of Australia's nationally notifiable diseases for 2 to 15 March 2026. -
Microplastics and health report
This Allen & Clarke Consulting report provides the findings of a targeted review of international and Australian evidence on the potential health impacts of microplastics. -
Australian Respiratory Surveillance Report – 23 March to 5 April 2026
This Australian Respiratory Surveillance Report (ARSR) includes information about acute respiratory illnesses including COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus. -
Diphtheria in Australia – Epidemiological update – 8 April 2026
This report provides information about the epidemiology of diphtheria in Australia. -
Evidence reviews
This collection contains evidence reviews prepared by independent experts that we commissioned. -
Simple steps to improve your indoor air quality at home (brochure)
This brochure explains why indoor air quality is important, how poor air quality can impact your health and how you can improve your indoor air quality at home. -
Improve your indoor air quality at home (poster)
This poster provides information and tips to help you improve your indoor air quality at home. -
National strategies for bloodborne viruses and sexually transmissible infections
This collection contains national strategy documents that address the impact of bloodborne viruses and sexually transmissible infections on the Australian community. Together they form a framework and agreed direction for a high-quality, coordinated national response to these diseases. -
Sixth National Hepatitis C Strategy 2025–2030
We coordinate Australia’s national response to bloodborne viruses (BBV) and sexually transmissible infections (STI) through development, implementation and stewardship of 6 national strategies.