Why it’s important
Germs (including bacteria and viruses) on your hands can enter your body when you touch your eyes, nose, or mouth.
Germs can also spread to other people:
- directly when you touch them
- indirectly after you touch shared objects or surfaces or prepare food.
Regular handwashing with soap and water removes dirt and reduces the number of germs on your hands.
It helps prevent the spread of germs, including those that cause common respiratory and gastrointestinal diseases.
When to wash your hands
Wash your hands often, including:
- when you can see dirt on your hands
- before and after eating or preparing food – including after handling raw meat, poultry or seafood
- after using the toilet, helping somebody go to the toilet or changing a nappy
- after coughing, sneezing or blowing your nose
- before and after caring for someone who is sick
- before and after treating a cut or wound
- after touching frequently touched surfaces in public places – such as handrails and lift buttons
- before touching your face
- after touching, feeding or cleaning up after animals
- after handling rubbish
- after coming inside from outside.
How to wash your hands
- Wet your hands under running water – warm water works best.
- Add enough soap to cover all surfaces of your hands.
- Rub your hands together for at least 20 seconds – clean all areas including palms, backs of hands, between fingers and under nails.
- Rinse well under running water to remove all the soap.
- Dry your hands completely with a clean towel or paper towel.
Teach children how to wash their hands properly and encourage them to do it regularly and when needed.
Using alcohol-based hand sanitiser
If you don’t have soap and water, an alcohol-based hand sanitiser can be a good alternative.
Alcohol-based hand sanitisers with at least 60% ethanol or isopropanol are effective against many bacteria and viruses. Always follow the directions on the label.
Alcohol-based hand sanitisers only work if your hands look clean. They are less effective than soap and water for some gastrointestinal viruses. Wash your hands with soap and water if they are visibly dirty and after using the toilet.
Always supervise children when they’re using hand sanitisers.
To use hand sanitiser:
- Put about half a teaspoon of hand sanitiser in the palm of your hand.
- Rub your hands together, covering all surfaces including between your fingers.
- Keep rubbing for at least 20 seconds or until your hands are dry.
Learn more
For more information, see: