Health impacts of toxins and contaminants
Environmental toxins and contaminants are physical, chemical and biological pollutants and organisms that can cause:
- cancer
- cardiovascular issues
- endocrine issues
- respiratory disease.
Common environmental toxins include:
- poisonous chemicals and chemical compounds, like pesticides
- physical materials, like asbestos
- organisms, like mould and blue-green algae.
The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water is the main agency that monitors hazardous waste. This includes maintaining the National Pollutant Inventory, which informs the community, industry, and government about substance emissions in Australia.
Asbestos
Asbestos is a mineral used in Australian building material until the mid-1980s. Most houses built before 1990 contain asbestos.
Asbestos fibres can go into the air if there is damage to the building. Inhaling asbestos fibres can cause:
- pleural plaques – thick tissue that forms in the lining of the lung
- asbestosis
- lung cancer
- mesothelioma.
In Australia, 90% of all mesothelioma patients were exposed to asbestos.
During a building fire or bushfire, asbestos in the air is less of a concern. But you should always wear personal protective equipment and wet the debris to avoid dust when cleaning up.
Use a licensed asbestos removalist wherever possible.
The Asbestos Safety and Eradication Agency (ASEA) is the main agency responsible for improving asbestos awareness and ensuring asbestos is effectively and safely managed, removed and disposed of.
For more information, see ASEA’s:
- Guides for communicating about asbestos risk
- Asbestos safety for householders and home renovators guide.
PFAS
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are synthetic chemicals that are used to make products resistant to heat, stains, grease and water.
See what we're doing about PFAS in Australia.
Mould
Mould is a type of fungus that grows in moist and humid areas like in garden composts and on decaying organic matter. It can also grow indoors on damp and poorly ventilated areas like leaking roofs and walls and from faulty plumbing and condensation.
Breathing in mould spores can cause:
- nasal congestion
- sneezing
- coughing or wheezing
- respiratory infections.
People with weakened immune systems, allergies, severe asthma or lung diseases are particularly vulnerable.
Mould is often an issue after a cyclone or flood, due to excess moisture, long periods of heat and humidity, and pooling of water.
Learn more about potential health effects of mould in the environment.
Mould related-illness
Clandestine drug laboratory toxins
Laboratories that manufacture illegal drugs in secret are called clandestine drug laboratories.
Most illegal drug laboratories are in residential buildings, and although police remove chemicals and equipment, there can be residual toxins on surfaces.
Exposure to drug toxins and gases can cause behavioural, psychological, or physiological health effects.
The frequency and severity of these effects increase with the nature, level and duration of exposure.
Learn more about the public health risk of clandestine drug laboratories.