Vaccine-preventable diseases remain a serious threat to the health of Australians.
Immunisation is one of the main lines of defence against vaccine-preventable diseases. Australia’s vaccination rates remain high, but rates have fallen in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
With input from healthcare professionals, health experts, state and territory government representatives and the community, the National Immunisation Strategy for Australia 2025‒2030 sets a vision for a healthier Australia through immunisation.
It is supported by a mission to reduce the impact of vaccine-preventable diseases through high uptake of safe, effective and equitable immunisation across the lifespan.
The strategy provides a framework to achieve this mission by prioritising:
- equity and access to immunisation, especially among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and other priority populations
- strengthening the immunisation workforce to be prepared for future health emergencies
- building trust, understanding and acceptance of immunisation through engagement with communities
- making better use of data to more effectively target immunisation strategies and monitor performance
- harnessing new vaccine technologies to respond to an evolving communicable disease and vaccine landscape
- implementing sustainable reforms in vaccine programs.
The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing will be working with the states and territories to implement the strategy.
The strategy is one of the first deliverables of the interim Australian Centre for Disease Control.
It takes a whole-of-system approach to immunisation, and focuses on future preparedness, to respond to an evolving communicable disease and vaccine landscape.
See the National Immunisation Strategy for Australia 2025–2030 and related resources.