What we know
Common seasonal respiratory illnesses
Autumn and winter often mean a rise in respiratory illnesses, and this year is likely to be no different. In the colder months, people often spend more time indoors, causing illnesses to spread more easily from one person to another.
The common cold, flu, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are seasonal and most common during the autumn and winter months. Sometimes flu can remain high into spring and summer.
Babies and young children are at higher risk of flu and RSV infections and are more vulnerable to severe disease.
COVID-19 does not follow a regular seasonal pattern yet, but usually also peaks during winter. Older adults and people with chronic health conditions are most at risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Other respiratory illnesses – rhinovirus, adenovirus, human metapneumovirus (hMPV) and parainfluenza – are often more common in winter too. These viruses typically cause mild, cold-like illnesses in people of all ages.
Healthcare services
The number of people who visit a healthcare centre or become hospitalised often rises from April when seasonal illnesses begin to spread more.
Young children and older adults are especially likely to need medical care or hospitalisation for respiratory illnesses during peak periods.
Preparing early so you can stay healthy helps reduce the burden on our healthcare system.
High-risk groups
Some people are at greater risk of severe disease, hospitalisation and – in extreme cases – death. These include:
- babies and young children (aged under 5 years)
- older people (aged 65 years or older)
- people who are pregnant
- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
- people with chronic conditions
- people who are immunocompromised.
Vaccination
Our Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports showed that by late 2025:
- 70% of children under 5 years and 38% of adults aged 65 years and over had not received a flu vaccine
- 89% of adults and 95% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults had not received a COVID-19 vaccine
With fewer people getting vaccinated for seasonal illnesses – especially in high-risk groups – the risk of serious illness increases.
What we recommend
Vaccination
The best way to protect yourself and the people around you from serious illness is to get your recommended vaccines.
The Australian Immunisation Handbook recommends specific immunisations for respiratory illnesses based on your risk level, including:
- an annual flu vaccination for everyone 6 months or older – especially around April or May
- a COVID-19 vaccination or booster for people at higher risk of serious illness
- a single dose of RSV vaccine for older people
- a single dose of RSV vaccine for pregnant people from 28 weeks gestation
- a single dose of nirsevimab (an RSV immunisation product) for young infants if either
- they are at high-risk
- their mother wasn’t vaccinated during pregnancy
It’s especially important to get all your recommended vaccinations if you work in a high-risk setting like healthcare, aged care, or disability support.
Find more information about your state and territory immunisation health services.
Other prevention steps
In addition to vaccination, good hygiene and respiratory etiquette help limit the spread of respiratory illnesses. Protect yourself and others by:
- staying home and away from others when you are sick (including people you live with as much as possible)
- speaking to your doctor about an early testing and antiviral treatment plan if you are at higher risk – it can help reduce your risk of serious illness and shorten the time you are unwell
- wearing a face mask during peak respiratory illness seasons
- covering your mouth and nose when sneezing or coughing
- washing your hands often.
If you work in a high-risk setting like healthcare, aged care, or disability support facilities, it’s important to strengthen your preparedness plans, and infection, prevention and control measures.
Staff and visitors to these settings should also wear a face mask – especially during periods of increased respiratory illness.
These steps don’t just keep you safe, they also help protect those most at risk.
Learn more about preventing the spread of respiratory viruses.