Welcome back to the National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry. In this video, you’ll learn how to manage patients and notifications in the portal.
Once you’ve submitted a notification, the patient will be displayed in your Patient list on the Physician dashboard. The Patient list allows you to view, edit, and remove patients.
You can find a patient either by sorting the Patient list by the date of notification or by searching for the patient’s name.
To find your patient, Alex Smith, type their family name into the search bar.
If you chose to save the patient notification rather than submit it, the patient will be displayed in the Draft notification list.
Clicking ‘view/edit’ will allow you to complete the notification.
For a patient with a submitted notification, clicking ‘view/edit’ will let you perform actions such as updating the patient’s consent responses, adding a new respiratory disease, adding medical tests to the patient’s record, or providing additional information.
Selecting ‘view/edit’ will bring you back to the Patient details page.
You can then add your desired additional information and select ‘Save as draft’ or ‘Save and next’ to submit.
Through the Patient list, you can also remove a draft or submitted notification.
Removing a draft notification will permanently delete the draft notification.
If you choose to remove a patient from your Patient list, you’ll need to select a reason for doing so. You can remove a patient from your list if you are no longer treating them or if the patient was added in error.
Thank you for taking the time to learn how to manage patients and notifications.
For more information about the national registry, visit the department’s website.
You can also contact the National Registry help desk with any queries you may have about using the portal.