Today marks the 10th annual global One Health Day.
One Health is a collaborative approach that recognises the interconnection between the health of people, animals, plants, and the environment.
When you protect one, you protect them all, and One Health works to promote sustainable ecosystems and improved wellbeing for all Australian communities.
With rapid changes to our climate, our shared environments and increased interaction with animals, diseases that come from these interactions are becoming more common.
Examples include bird flu, Q fever, and mosquito-borne diseases like Japanese encephalitis virus.
One Health is a key principle of the interim Australian Centre for Disease Control.
We bring together experts across sectors to holistically address disease threats and preserve national health security.
This includes everything from prevention to detection, preparedness, response and management.
The One Health Network
The One Health Network, established in December 2024, connects the Australian Government departments spanning all aspects of human, animal and environmental health.
On this One Health Day, we are celebrating these partnerships, and examples of our collaboration in action.
Our work with key agencies as part of the national High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI) Preparedness Taskforce is a prime example.
The taskforce uses a One Health approach to help prepare Australia for potential impacts of a H5 bird flu outbreak.
This initiative was recognised at the recent IPAA 2025 Spirit of Service Awards, acknowledging the collaboration between the Australian government agencies.
We also co-hosted the inaugural One Health Symposium with the Australian Government One Health Network.
The event was held in June 2025 to strengthen cross-sector connections and collaboration on One Health.
The Australian Government One Health Network is proud to support One Health Day – connecting people, knowledge and action for a healthier, more sustainable nation.
Learn more
Read more about One Health and how we’re working towards it.