At a glance
- No vaccine available – read more about prevention
- Nationally notifiable disease
About Murray Valley encephalitis
MVE is a rare but serious infection of the brain and spinal cord.
It is caused by the MVE virus, which is spread by certain types of mosquitoes.
Why it matters to public health
For many people, MVE virus infection causes no symptoms or mild symptoms. Symptoms might appear general at first in those who get them but can progress to become very serious.
Up to 1 in 3 people who develop encephalitis die from the disease. Of those who do survive, up to half develop long-term neurological issues.
There is no vaccine or specific treatment.
The main type of mosquito that carries MVE virus can be found across Australia. The virus is present in mosquitoes in northern Australia and sometimes spreads to south-eastern Australia.
Outbreaks happen infrequently but are always serious.
Because of these major impacts, we:
- work alongside colleagues in the animal and environmental sectors to promote a One Health coordinated approach to monitoring MVE
- plan for how to manage outbreaks.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Common, mild symptoms can include:
Less than 0.5% of people who are infected develop serious illness, including:
- brain inflammation (encephalitis)
- inflammation of the lining of the brain and the spinal cord (meningitis).
In children, about 1 in 20 may develop serious illness.
Symptoms of encephalitis and meningitis include:
- drowsiness
- confusion
- tremor
- neck stiffness
- seizures
- coma
- irritability (for babies who are infected).
Read more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of MVE.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start between 7 and 12 days after an infected mosquito bite, but this can range from 5 to 28 days.
How it spreads
MVE virus is spread through bites of certain types of mosquitoes after they have fed on infected waterbirds.
The type of mosquitoes that spread MVE virus are found throughout Australia and in Papua New Guinea.
These mosquitoes are usually active:
- from mid-spring to late autumn in south-eastern Australia
- all year in northern Australia.
Mosquito activity is more likely after heavy rainfall and flooding, or around wetlands.
People who have recovered from MVE virus are not likely to get infected again.
Infectious period
People cannot transmit the virus to each other or to mosquitoes.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against MVE virus infection.
The best protection against MVE virus is to prevent mosquito bites.
Read more about preventing MVE virus.
Priority groups and settings
Some people are at greater risk of getting MVE or getting very sick from it.
If you are at increased risk of being exposed to MVE virus, it is especially important to take steps to protect yourself from mosquitoes.
People at greater risk of severe disease
Everyone is at risk of developing serious disease after MVE virus infection.
But the risk of severe illness is greater for:
- infants and young children
- people aged 50 years or older
- people who are immunocompromised.
People at greater risk of exposure
People are at increased risk of being exposed to MVE if they:
- work or spend a lot of time outdoors
- live or work near wetlands or rivers
- live in or travel to areas where the virus has been detected – especially northern Australia or Papua New Guinea.
Diagnosis and treatment
MVE virus infection diagnosis usually requires:
- a blood test
- assessment of symptoms
- review of recent travel history and exposure to mosquitoes.
Spinal fluid (lumbar puncture) and urine tests are sometimes required to diagnose MVE virus infection.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
There is no specific treatment for MVE virus infection.
If you have severe symptoms, you will likely need to be cared for in hospital.
Read more about diagnosing and managing MVE virus infection.
Surveillance and reporting
MVE virus infection is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report laboratory confirmed and probable cases to us through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
This is part of national surveillance activities to monitor case numbers around the country and understand disease patterns.
Public health authorities take a One Health approach to surveillance of MVE virus. In addition to human disease surveillance, relevant government departments help monitor MVE virus in mosquitoes and animals.
We analyse the data and publish case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
Outbreaks
In areas where cases are not normally reported, one case of MVE virus infection may be considered an outbreak. In other areas, an increase in cases or a cluster of cases might trigger an outbreak response.
Control measures used during outbreaks focus on humans, animals and the environment, and include:
- animal surveillance to track the virus
- mosquito control activities
- communication to health professionals to increase awareness of MVE and its signs and symptoms
- making sure that personal mosquito control items are available, including in local shops
- mosquito bite prevention education and promotion.
Support
For information about MVE in your state or territory, see:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.
For travel advice, see Smartraveller.