Our commitment to transparency
Subject to limited exemptions, we publish all advice that our Director-General gives to a minister or government within 30 days of that advice.
Director-General’s advice
Find independent, evidence-informed public health advice from our Director-General.
Advice publishing process
Read about the process for publishing the Director-General's advice and why and when we might redact some information.
Disease prevention advice
Explore practical guidance to help you prevent the spread of illness in everyday situations.
Preventing the spread of germs through hand hygiene
Learn about good hand washing practices to prevent the spread of germs.
Preventing the spread of respiratory viruses
Take practical steps to reduce the risk of getting infected and spreading respiratory illnesses.
Preventing foodborne illness
Get practical advice on how to handle food safely to prevent food poisoning.
Preventing sexually transmissible infections
Find out how you can prevent the spread of sexually transmissible infections.
Preventing mosquito bites
Get advice on how to prevent diseases spread by mosquito bites.
Preventing tick bites
Get advice on how to prevent disease spread by ticks.
Preventing infectious diseases while travelling
Learn how to protect yourself while travelling – before you leave, while you’re away and after you return.
Coping with heatwaves
Find some tips on how to stay cool during extreme heat and heatwaves.
Preventing disease after floods
Find some tips on protecting yourself from disease after a flood.
Preventing mould exposure
Find practical tips to prevent mould and exposure to spores.
Staying safe from bushfire smoke
Find practical tips to keep yourself safe from bushfire smoke.