Last updated:
Before you go
Plan ahead for a safe holiday:
- Talk to your healthcare professional about how to protect yourself, including any recommended vaccinations or medicines for your destination.
- Check Smartraveller for the latest travel advice for each country you’re heading to.
While you’re away
Stay healthy so you can enjoy every moment:
- Protect yourself from mosquito bites which can cause serious illnesses like dengue fever and Japanese encephalitis virus.
- Drink bottled water to reduce the risk of harmful bacteria, parasites or viruses.
- Avoid ordering ice in drinks.
- Eat food that’s been well cooked and avoid undercooked or raw dishes that could cause food poisoning. Avoid salads with ingredients that may have been washed in tap water, like lettuce and other leafy greens.
- Wash your hands often to avoid the spread of germs.
- Wear a mask in crowded places to reduce the risk of respiratory illnesses.
- Practise safe sex to protect against sexually transmitted infections.
- Avoid contact with animals, which can carry zoonotic diseases, and practise good personal hygiene if contact is unavoidable.
When you return
Help reduce the spread of severe illnesses:
- Keep an eye out for any symptoms of illness.
- Tell your doctor about your travel history if you feel unwell.
- Take extra care when you go out or spend time with others – even without symptoms you could still spread viruses.
Your holiday should be memorable for all the right reasons. Plan ahead, stay safe, and help keep the holidays safe and fun for everyone!