Making a notification to the registry
Welcome to the National Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry, a tool that stores data about occupational respiratory diseases in Australia.
The registry is now accepting notifications.
Physicians can use the registry to report occupational respiratory diseases.
Who can make these notifications? Only specialised physicians may notify the registry.
These specialties include occupational and environmental medicine or respiratory and sleep medicine.
It’s important to be aware of your reporting obligations.
Physicians must report prescribed occupational respiratory diseases to the registry.
While not mandatory, non-prescribed occupational respiratory diseases can also be reported with patient consent.
Silicosis is the only prescribed disease for all states and territories.
Additional diseases that require notification vary depending on which jurisdiction you practice in. Access the department's website to confirm your notifying obligations.
If you’ve made a diagnosis of silicosis for your patient, Alex Smith, you’ll need to make a notification. Let’s go through the steps you’d take to make a notification in the portal.
Log in to the portal with your Standard or Strong myGovID.
To notify a new patient, first you need to identify the patient by entering either their Medicare card number, DVA number or IHI number. After you’ve entered the patient’s identifying information, select ‘next’.
On the Patient details screen that follows, you’ll enter the patient’s demographic and contact information.
Please note that all fields marked with an asterisk are mandatory.
When finished, select ‘Save and next’.
Then, you'll be taken to the Disease and exposure details screen. Here, you can enter values from lung function tests and upload the associated files if available.
To add the patient’s respiratory disease and exposure details, select the ‘Add respiratory disease’ button.
Be aware that all fields in the respiratory disease and exposure details window are mandatory fields, and you won’t be able to save partially completed responses.
To save your entry once complete, select ‘Save disease details.’
Once you’ve saved the disease and exposure details, you’ll have entered the minimum information required to make a notification to the Registry.
Select ‘Save and next’ to navigate to the additional information screen.
Including additional information is optional and requires the patient’s consent.
After you’ve entered any additional information you wish to provide, select ‘Save and next.’
On the Submit notification page, you can choose to submit a notification if all required information is complete, or you can choose to save a notification as a draft if you need to come back and complete it.
Thank you for taking the time to learn how to make notifications to the National Registry.
For more information about the national registry, visit the department’s website.
You can also contact the national registry helpdesk with any queries you may have about using the portal.