At a glance
- No vaccine available – read more about prevention
- Not nationally notifiable.
About Flinders Island spotted fever
Flinders Island spotted fever is caused by the Rickettsia honei bacterium, which is carried by the southern reptile tick Bothriocroton hydrosauri.
This tick species is found in:
- Flinders Island
- Tasmania
- south-eastern Australia
- south-western coastal regions of Western Australia on Salisbury Island and in Walpole
- south-eastern coastal regions of South Australia near Adelaide.
Flinders Island spotted fever is part of a group of illnesses caused by Rickettsia bacteria, which includes other spotted fever infections and typhus infections. It causes similar symptoms to Queensland tick typhus and Australian spotted fever.
For most people, Flinders Island spotted fever is mild, but it can be serious and cause severe illness.
Why it matters to public health
Flinders Island spotted fever can be hard to diagnose, as it mimics other illnesses. This can delay treatment.
Although it is usually mild, if not treated early, symptoms can persist for a few weeks before resolving. Complications can require hospitalisation, and, rarely, cause death.
Symptoms
Early symptoms are often non-specific, making diagnosis challenging.
Common symptoms include:
- fever
- headache
- fatigue
- muscle pain
- joint pain
- rash with both raised and flat lesions
- cough.
Complications can include:
- severe pneumonia
- neurological symptoms, such as confusion, unsteady gait and seizures
- severe vasculitis
- severe vessel thrombosis
- necrosis.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start between 7 to 14 days after getting infected.
How it spreads
Flinders Island spotted fever spreads to humans through the bite of infected ticks after they have fed on an infected animal or person.
The tick species that spreads Flinders Island spotted fever – Bothriocroton hydrosauri – is found on reptiles, including lizards, snakes, and terrestrial turtles. It also feeds on humans, cattle and horses.
Infectious period
Flinders Island spotted fever does not spread between people.
People who have had Flinders Island spotted fever are not likely to get infected again.
Prevention
There is no vaccine against Flinders Island spotted fever.
The best protection is to prevent tick bites and correctly remove an attached tick. Never disturb the tick or try to remove it while it’s alive.
Priority groups and settings
People who regularly spend a lot of time outdoors are most at risk. It’s important to take steps to prevent tick bites.
People at greater risk of severe disease
Those at greater risk of severe disease include:
- older people
- people who are immunocompromised
- people whose treatment is delayed.
People at greater risk of exposure
People are at greater risk of being exposed if they live, work or spend a lot of time outdoors – especially in grassy, bushy or wooded areas – in regions where infected ticks are found.
Peak season for Flinders Island spotted fever is spring and summer, but it can occur at any time of year.
Diagnosis and treatment
Flinders Island spotted fever is usually diagnosed through a blood test.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Flinders Island spotted fever is treated with antibiotics.
Read more about how to manage or treat Flinders Island spotted fever.
Surveillance and reporting
Tick-borne rickettsial diseases, like Flinders Island spotted fever, are not nationally notifiable diseases in Australia, but health professionals must notify state authorities of cases of:
- Flinders Island spotted fever in Tasmania
- rickettsial infection in Western Australia
- typhus (all types) in the Northern Territory
- typhus (epidemic) in New South Wales.
Support
Read more about:
- Flinders Island spotted fever
- tick bites and tick bite diseases
- tick bites on healthdirect.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.