Experts protecting Australia’s health
The Director-General is the head of the Australian Centre for Disease Control.
She provides national leadership in assessing public health risk, overseeing our analytical, policy, operational and advisory work.
The Director-General is supported by:
- the Australian CDC Advisory Council, which brings together leading experts from across Australia to help inform her advice and is chaired by the Director-General
- a strong leadership team
- about 250 staff across 6 branches.
Together, the Director-General, the Advisory Council, our leadership team and our in-house specialists form our core expertise.
Director-General
As a statutory office holder, the Director-General is responsible for:
- providing independent, evidence-informed advice to governments, other government agencies and states and territories on public health risk and other matters
- advising and consulting with
- Australian Government bodies
- state and territory bodies
- international bodies
- peak bodies
- making recommendations about Australia’s preparedness and response to disease outbreaks and other health threats
- collecting, analysing and sharing information and data related to public health
- publishing reports, statements and guidelines that help protect the health of people in Australia
- promoting public health research, education and workforce development.
Professor Zoe Wainer
Professor Zoe Wainer has more than 20 years of experience across government, health care, clinical governance, academia and international public health organisations.
She is a highly regarded policy leader, medical doctor and academic, with leadership roles spanning public health including population health, communicable disease control, prevention, promotion, primary care, emergency management and public health architecture and systems.
Professor Wainer is a registered medical practitioner with a clinical background in cardiothoracic surgery and thoracic surgical oncology. She holds a PhD and Master of Public Health from the University of Melbourne, and is an Enterprise Professor in the Melbourne School of Population and Global Health.
Professor Wainer previously served as the Deputy Secretary for Community and Public Health in the Victorian Department of Health and led one of the country’s largest public health divisions, in addition to roles in the private sector, global health and statewide health system governance.
Advisory Council
The Advisory Council will support the Director-General to fulfil their functions and responsibilities.
The Director-General will chair the council, which will also include the Australian Government Chief Medical Officer and 6 to 10 other members.
The Minister for Health and Ageing will appoint members with recognised expertise and experience in:
- public health
- clinical practice
- human rights
- data and statistics
- communications
- economics
- emergency management
- the health needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
- the health needs of people with disability.
The Advisory Council will not have decision-making powers.
Although members are appointed by the Minister for Health and Ageing, the Advisory Council’s role is to provide independent expert advice to the Director-General.
This structure ensures that public health advice and action are informed by a broad range of expert evidence, and delivered in a way that is free from political influence.
Leadership team
Deputy Director-General – Public Health
Emily Harper
The Public Health Division focuses on delivering technical and specialist advice, policy, and activities to address public health threats.
Emily started her career as a nurse, working clinically for several years before undertaking various Senior Executive roles within State Government and in the private sector prior to joining the Australian Public Service.
Emily has undergraduate and postgraduate qualifications in nursing, forensic science, epidemiology and public health. Emily joins the CDC from the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing, most recently heading up the Market and Workforce Division within the Ageing and Aged Care Group.
She has previously held Senior Executive positions within the Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Division, the Office of Health Protection and Response and Chief Budget Officer within the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing.
Emily brings her experience in complex, ‘wicked’ problems to the CDC, with public health matters having been central to Emily’s career to this point.
Career highlights to date include leading the Office of Health Protection and Response during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the development and implementation of the Australian-first music festival pill testing trial while leading Population and Preventive Health Branch within the ACT Government.
Deputy Director-General – Strategy and Operations
Paul McCormack
The Strategy and Operations Division takes a whole-of-agency approach, encompassing policy coordination, agency strategy, data governance, stewardship, and enabling functions.
Paul’s Commonwealth public service career has spanned 25 years across policy, program, service delivery, corporate and leadership roles in a range of social policy areas including immigration, citizenship, health and aged care.
Paul led the Financial Management Division in what was then the Department of Health and Aged Care from April 2019 where he was responsible for administering the department’s Financial Strategy and for oversight of its system of financial controls and assurance.
From August 2023, Paul was the Interim Chief Executive Officer of the National Mental Health Commission where he led a series of cultural and organisational reforms in response to findings of an Independent Investigation into the Commission.
Paul joined the interim CDC in late September 2025 as Deputy Director-General designate for Strategy and Operations, where he helped lead the ramp up of organisational readiness work to support the establishment of the Australian CDC on 1 January 2026.
Chief Medical Advisor
To be confirmed
The Chief Medical Advisor provides clinical and scientific leadership across the CDC.
They provide clinical expertise to ensure policies reflect best practice and are medically sound.
They also act as a key spokesperson for the CDC and advisor to government, helping to protect and improve the health of Australians.
General Counsel
Raoul Salpeter
The General Counsel provides high-level legal advice to support the agency’s leadership and operations. He:
- ensures compliance with laws and regulations
- manages legal risks
- assists with legislation and policy matters
- oversees dispute resolution
- upholds integrity within the Australian Public Service framework.
Raoul is a highly experienced government lawyer. Before starting as the inaugural General Counsel, he had worked for 20 years as a Principal Lawyer in the Legal Division at the Australian Government Department of Health.
Assistant Director-General – Communicable Diseases Branch
Dr Stephanie Williams PSM
The Communicable Diseases Branch coordinates public health efforts to prevent, monitor, and control specific communicable diseases, with special attention to priority populations and disease control goals. This includes end-to-end consideration of communicable diseases and health threats, including surveillance, policy and strategy.
Prior to this role, Stephanie served as Australia’s Ambassador for Regional Health Security from March 2020 until October 2023. As Ambassador, Dr Williams supported the advancement of Australia’s interests in the Indo-Pacific by fostering linkages between Australia’s world-class public health and medical research experts and partners.
She guided the implementation of 2 major health initiatives: Partnerships for a Healthy Region ($620 million, 2022–23 to 2026–27) and the $523 million regional Vaccine Access Initiative. She also was Australia’s Alternate Member on the Board of the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria.
Dr Williams is a Public Health Physician and Epidemiologist. She was the Principal Specialist Health at the Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade from 2017 to 2023, and previously served as:
- Medical Adviser to the Chief Medical Officer
- Public Health Registrar for Victoria’s Chief Health Officer
- Epidemiologist in Global Health Security for the World Health Organization (WHO)
- medical doctor for Medicines Sans Frontières and the WHO.
Dr Williams holds a Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery from Monash University, a Master of Public Health and Tropical Medicine from James Cook University, and a Master of Applied Epidemiology from Australian National University (ANU). She is a Fellow of the Australasian Faculty of Public Health Medicine.
Assistant Director-General – One Health, Climate and Environment Branch
Rajan Martin
The One Health, Climate and Environment Branch delivers coordinated public health efforts to prevent, monitor, and control health threats associated with the environment, animals, occupational exposures and antimicrobial resistance. This includes consideration of One Health and climate change issues, covering surveillance, policy and strategy.
Rajan Martin has worked in the public sector in senior policy and program implementation roles for nearly 30 years including in areas of aged care, public health, First Nations health and hearing and disability care.
He has undergraduate Arts and Science degrees from the Australian National University and a Master of Medical Sciences (Clinical Epidemiology) from the University of Newcastle.
Assistant Director-General – Preparedness Branch
Emma Denehy
The Preparedness Branch strengthens national public health security through laboratory networks, biosecurity measures, infectious disease intelligence, and emergency preparedness.
Emma Denehy is an experienced public health expert, who previously held the role of Assistant Secretary, Public Health and Surveillance, Department of Health, Disability and Ageing.
Emma has more than 25 years’ experience in state, national and international public health systems for infectious diseases. She brings expertise in disease surveillance, outbreak response and laboratory diagnostics.
Emma is an Epidemiologist and Certified Health Informatics Practitioner, leading strategic public health initiatives, including national surveillance programs and policy.
Emma brings a forward-thinking mindset, championing innovation and equitable public health strategies to deliver impactful, data-informed solutions that strengthen Australia’s public health systems to protect communities from emerging and ongoing health threats.
Assistant Director-General – Strategy and Engagement Branch
Masha Somi
The Strategy and Engagement Branch advances national public health leadership through strategic governance, partnerships, coordination, communication and engagement, and expanded health priorities.
It supports agency-wide strategic delivery, including through management of cross-cutting priority strategies, supporting effective governance, and public health partnerships.
Over the past 15 years, Dr Somi has held leadership roles in the Australian Public Service working on national health programs in medical research, immunisation, preventive health, strategic policy, and First Nations health.
She has a PhD in Health Economics and Bachelors degrees in Economics (Honours) and Arts from The Australian National University.
Assistant Director-General – Data, Evidence and Analytics Branch
Jacob Madden
The Data, Evidence and Analytics Branch governs a modern, ethical, and intelligent public health data and surveillance ecosystem to deliver insights for action.
Before joining the Australian CDC, Jacob led the Strategy Branch to deliver the policy development and legislation work to establish the Australian CDC. This included extensive stakeholder engagement and complex policy work with state and territory governments to design a data sharing regime to support public health activities.
Previous roles in the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing include leading the response to COVID-19 and other emergencies in aged care settings and supporting aged care prudential reforms. This included building and redesigning reporting of COVID-19 cases and other supports to aged care homes, harnessing data to support delivery of government supports.
He is familiar with working with complex data and establishing processes to ensure strong data governance and the quality of reporting outputs.
Throughout roles across the Australian Public Service, Jacob has delivered complex strategic policy projects and advice, anchored in data and evidence. A consistent theme has been in using data to tell a compelling policy narrative in support of a national policy agenda – across health, aged care, social security, and international development portfolios.
Jacob holds a Master of Public Health from the Australian National University and a Bachelor of Laws (Hons)/Bachelor of Arts from the University of Notre Dame Australia.
Assistant Director-General – Operations and Integrity Branch
Bernard Philbrick
The Operations and Integrity Branch enables effective public health leadership through integrated corporate services, governance, and strategic workforce and infrastructure support.
Bernard Philbrick is the Chief Operating Officer at the Australian CDC, and led the establishment of corporate and governance functions for the agency.
Previously, he led the Department of Health’s Financial Business Support, Strategic Procurement and Budget branches, supporting financial management capability uplift, COVID‑19 procurement and major construction programs. Bernard has extensive Commonwealth Budget experience at the Department of Finance, where he led policy and program analysis on significant aspects of the Education, Industry, Health and Attorney-General portfolios.
Bernard’s leadership style is collaborative, collegiate, and empowering – he builds high-performing teams by fostering trust, encouraging open communication, and supporting innovation. He is known for his approachable and good-humoured manner, prioritising staff welfare and continuous improvement.
He holds law and arts degrees from the ANU and has received Australia Day and Secretary’s Awards, particularly for work on Superannuation and Family Violence response reforms.
Our structure