Copyright details
© Commonwealth of Australia
The content on this website is copyright.
Except where otherwise indicated, you can download, display, print and reproduce the whole or part of this content in unaltered form for:
- your own personal use
- internal use within your organisation.
You must retain this copyright notice and all disclaimer notices as part of any reproduction.
You must not use:
- any photographs on this website
- the whole or any part of the content on this website for any commercial purpose.
Apart from any use permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 (such as ‘fair dealing’) or allowed by this copyright notice, all other rights are reserved.
Third party copyright
Wherever a third party holds copyright in content on this website, the copyright remains with that third party. You should contact them directly because you may need their permission.
Images
The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website provides information on how you can request permission to use the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.
Contact us to request permission to use the Australian Centre for Disease Control logo.
Linking to our website
You may link to this website, at your own expense and responsibility, but you must not:
- alter any of the website's contents
- imply that the Australian Centre for Disease Control or the Australian Government endorses or recommends your website
- reproduce, frame or reformat the files, pages, images, information and materials from this website on any other website unless we have given express written permission.
We reserve the right to prevent linking by giving you notice.
Contact
For requests and enquiries about permission, contact us.