Last updated:
Key collections and publications
These collections and publications contain key CDNA guidelines, case definitions and reports.
CDNA Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs)
This collection contains all of the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs). These guidelines give nationally consistent advice and guidance to Public Health Units to help them respond to notifiable diseases using best practice.
CDNA surveillance case definitions
This collection contains surveillance case definition documents for nationally notifiable diseases within Australia. The Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) created these definitions to help health professionals decide whether to notify authorities of a case.
National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) fortnightly reports
This collection contains the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) fortnightly reports. These reports provide a fortnightly summary on notifications of Australia’s nationally notifiable disease.
CDNA National Guidelines for healthcare workers on managing bloodborne viruses
This collection contains the Communicable Diseases Network (CDNA) National Guidelines and accompanying fact sheets for healthcare workers living with, or at risk of exposure to, bloodborne viruses.
CDNA national guidelines for avian influenza – Protecting people who work with birds and wildlife
This guideline from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) provides information to employers and managers of bird and wildlife workers, including contractors or volunteers. The purpose of the guidelines is to protect these workers from all types of avian influenza (‘bird flu’).