Measles is a highly infectious viral illness, and multiple outbreaks are happening around the world, including Australia.
Measles is more than just a childhood illness, and protecting each other is a task for us all.
The measles situation in Australia
Australia is experiencing several outbreaks of measles.
Most measles cases in Australia this year have been in unvaccinated adults, aged between 20 and 49 years.
Measles cases in Australia are usually caught by people travelling overseas to holiday destinations where measles cases have been surging.
Analysis of the outbreak shows that after returning to Australia, some infected people are spreading measles to others, including young children and unvaccinated adults.
There is a misconception that measles only affects children, but adults can also catch this highly contagious disease.
Measles is so contagious that, in an unvaccinated or under-vaccinated population, a single contagious person can infect up to 18 other people.
Measles is more than a childhood illness
Measles is serious, even for adults and particularly for people who have a weakened immune system.
Measles can cause complications in up to 1 in 3 unvaccinated people. In some cases, measles can cause:
- brain swelling
- pneumonia
- pregnancy loss.
It can also lead to lasting disability such as:
- deafness
- seizures
- serious movement problems.
Measles can also cause you to lose immunity against diseases you have previous protection against from past infection or vaccination.
We call this immune amnesia, and it can make you susceptible to more infections more often.
Adults can also spread measles to babies and young children, who are more prone to serious complications from measles.
Protect yourself and your community from measles
The measles vaccine is safe and highly effective – 2 doses of the vaccine offers 99% protection against measles. Vaccination is the best way to protect yourself and others.
The 2-dose vaccination process started in Australia around 30 years ago. Adults born in Australia between 1966 and 1994 may have only had one dose in childhood. To gain full protection they still need a second dose.
If this is you, or if you are planning overseas travel and are unsure of your vaccination status, speak with your healthcare professional. They can check your vaccination history and provide you with a second dose if needed.
The measles combination vaccine is available for free under the National Immunisation Program (NIP) for eligible people.
Catch-up measles vaccinations are available at:
- GPs
- community health centres
- Aboriginal Medical Services
- pharmacies.
Most states and territories fund free catch-up measles vaccinations. Your service provider can discuss your eligibility. If you are not eligible under the NIP or state-funded catch-up programs, you can buy the vaccine.
Learn more about getting vaccinated.
If you think you have measles
If you believe you may have measles, stay at home and talk to your healthcare professional right away.
Call your doctor, medical practitioner, or hospital ahead of your visit if you need to attend in person. You must let them know you suspect measles and wear a properly fitted mask to protect others.
Learn more
See more information about: