Publications and resources
We publish resources and information to support the monitoring, management and prevention of diseases in Australia.
All publications and resources
Filter and search all our publications and resources.
Communicable Diseases Intelligence
Open access articles on the epidemiology, surveillance, prevention and control of communicable diseases in Australia.
Guidelines and definitions
Access our collections of national guidelines and case definitions.
National guidelines for public health units
Disease-specific national guidelines from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) to help public health units respond to communicable diseases.
Surveillance case definitions
Disease-specific definitions from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA) to help health professionals decide whether to notify authorities of a case.
Laboratory case definitions
Disease-specific case definitions from the Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) to help laboratory professionals determine whether a disease agent is present.
Environmental health guidance
Guidance from the Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth) on managing various environmental health risks.
Surveillance reports
Explore surveillance report and datasets.
National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) public datasets
Datasets for influenza, meningococcal disease, pneumococcal disease and salmonellosis.
NNDSS fortnightly reports
Fortnightly summaries of notifications of Australia’s nationally notifiable diseases.
Australian Respiratory Surveillance Reports
The latest analysis about acute respiratory illnesses, including COVID-19, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus.
Syphilis monitoring reports
Monitoring and surveillance reports for cases of syphilis in Australia.
National strategies and frameworks
National Framework for Communicable Disease Control
This framework helps to improve how all levels of government prevent, detect and respond to communicable diseases.
National Immunisation Strategy for Australia
This strategy guides our work to increase and sustain vaccination update in Australia over the next 5 years.
National strategies for bloodborne viruses (BBV) and sexually transmissible infection (STI)
These strategies provide an agreed national direction for high-quality, coordinated national response to BBV and STI.
National Health and Climate Strategy
This strategy sets out a whole-of-government plan to address the health and wellbeing impacts of climate change, and reduce the contribution of the health system to climate change.
National Microbial Genomics Framework for Public Health
This framework provides a national approach to integrating microbial genomics into the Australian public health system.
National Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy
This strategy provides a 20-year vision to tackling antimicrobial resistance – one of the greatest global threats to human, animal and environmental health.
Evidence reviews
Evidence reviews
This collection contains evidence reviews prepared by independent experts that we commissioned.