If you’re in areas of Queensland or New South Wales that might be impacted by Cyclone Alfred, it’s important to look after your health needs.
The cyclone might result in interrupted or limited access to health and medical services over the coming days.
Make sure you have essential medicines, prescriptions, and health-related items or equipment at hand, and keep them safe in a waterproof container. Prepare for possible power outages.
Always follow the emergency advice from local authorities. Your local ABC radio is a reliable source of information.
Read more advice on how to prepare:
Emergency contacts
- If you need urgent help from police, fire or ambulance services, call triple zero (000).
- In Queensland, for non-life-threatening flood and storm emergency assistance – see Queensland Fire and Emergency Services or call 13 74 68.
- In New South Wales, for non-life-threatening flood and storm emergency assistance – see New South Wales State Emergency Service or call 132 500.
Medical treatment or advice
If you need medical attention or medicine, contact your local:
- general practitioner (GP)
- pharmacy
- Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Service (ACCHS).
If they are closed, you can find a health service through:
- staff in evacuation centres
- healthdirect’s health service finder.
To speak with a registered nurse 24/7, call healthdirect on 1800 022 222, or call 13 HEALTH (13 43 26 58) if you are in Queensland. Depending on your symptoms you may be connected virtually to a GP.
healthdirect can also connect you to your local Medicare Urgent Care Clinic.
Mental health support
It’s normal to feel stressed or anxious in the lead-up to and during an emergency situation. Stay in contact with loved ones who may be in the path of the cyclone. Checking in on friends or family can support them at this time.
National, regional and local mental health supports funded by the Australian Government and state governments are available.
Immediate 24/7 mental health help is available. People impacted by Cyclone Alfred can contact the following support services.
| Health support | Contact numbers | Services |
|---|---|---|
| Lifeline | Call 13 11 14 | National counselling service |
| Beyond Blue | Call 1300 22 4636 | National mental health and wellbeing support service |
| MensLine | Call 1300 78 99 78 | National 24/7 online counselling support for men |
| Lifeline Text | Call 0477 13 11 14 | 24/7 crisis support text service |
| 13YARN | Call 13 92 76 | 24/7 crisis support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders |
| Kids Helpline | Call 1800 551 800 | Counselling service for young people aged 5 to 25 years |
| headspace | Call 1800 650 890 | A program for young people aged 12 to 25 years experiencing, or at risk of mild to moderate mental illness |
| Older Persons Advocacy Network | Call 1800 700 600 | Free, confidential and independent support for older people |
Find more flood and storm support.
Stay safe after the cyclone has passed
After the cyclone has passed, health threats may remain in affected areas.
- Never enter floodwater, including in a vehicle.
- Take care with drinking water, particularly if a boil water warning is issued.
- Throw out perishable food that has been unrefrigerated for an extended period, such as during a power outage.
- Make sure generators are running in properly ventilated areas, as they can produce hazardous exhaust fumes.
- Be aware that animals displaced by floodwaters may have moved close to your home, including dangerous snakes and spiders.
- Take protective steps if you are moving through areas with damaged building materials, as damaged homes may pose an asbestos exposure risk.
Find more information about: