Staying cool
To stay as cool as possible in extreme heat:
- drink plenty of water
- avoid drinks that can dehydrate you, like soft drinks, alcohol, tea, coffee, and other sweetened or caffeinated drinks
- wrap crushed ice in a damp towel and place it on your neck and chest to help cool your body down
- wear loose, lightweight clothing
- limit physical activity, especially outdoors, and take regular 10-minute breaks to lower your body temperature
- cool your home by closing windows and curtains and using air-conditioning or electric fans
- if you don’t have air conditioning, go somewhere that does like shopping centres
- go swimming in cool water – preferably in the shade – if you have access to it.
Keep an eye on your neighbours, friends and family – some people are at a higher risk of heat-related illness.
In case of heatstroke
Severe symptoms can be life-threatening. Cramps, thirst, fatigue, headache, or rash can be warning signs of a bigger issue.
Heatstroke – where your body can no longer regulate its body temperature – is a medical emergency.
Seek medical attention immediately if you experience:
- hot, dry skin
- sudden rises in body temperature
- dehydration and intense thirst
- rapid pulse and breathing
- nausea and vomiting
- unusual behaviour, confusion and slurred speech
- loss of consciousness, seizures or coma.
If you or someone else experiences symptoms of heatstroke call 000 immediately. While you are waiting for emergency treatment, take steps to lower the affected person’s temperature by:
- seek shade
- give them sips of cool water
- spraying them with cool water
- apply ice packs.
Learn more
Read more about coping with a heatwave.