At a glance
- No vaccine available – read more about prevention
- Nationally notifiable disease
About Barmah Forest virus infection
Barmah Forest virus infection spreads to people and animals through the bites of infected mosquitoes.
It usually causes mild illness, but some people develop joint pain and fatigue that may last for many months.
It causes symptoms similar to those caused by Ross River virus infection and chikungunya virus infection.
Why it matters to public health
The mosquitoes that spread Barmah Forest virus are found across Australia, including Tasmania.
Barmah Forest virus infection rarely causes serious illness, and many people don’t have symptoms. But some people get symptoms that last for a few months to a year.
The symptoms can impact people’s quality of life and ability to work.
There is no specific treatment or vaccine against Barmah Forest virus infection.
Because of these impacts, we:
- work alongside colleagues in the animal and environmental sectors to promote a One Health coordinated approach to monitoring Barmah Forest virus
- plan for how to manage outbreaks.
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Many people, especially children, do not have any symptoms after being infected with Barmah Forest virus.
For those who do develop symptoms, these include:
- fever
- chills
- headache
- rash
- joint pain and swelling
- muscle tenderness
- tiredness
- swollen lymph nodes.
Most people recover within a few weeks. But some people might have severe joint pain and fatigue that can last for several months to a year.
Read more about the symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of Barmah Forest virus infection.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start between 7 and 10 days after getting infected, but could be up to 21 days.
How it spreads
Barmah Forest virus spreads to people through bites from mosquitoes that have fed on infected people or animals – including marsupials, such as kangaroos and wallabies.
The types of mosquitoes that can spread Barmah Forest virus are found in all states and territories of Australia. They are usually most active during the wetter months, and after heavy rainfall and flooding.
Barmah Forest virus does not spread directly between people.
People who have had Barmah Forest virus infection are unlikely to get infected again.
Infectious period
People with Barmah Forest virus can spread it to mosquitoes for the first few days after their symptoms start, if present.
Prevention
The best protection against Barmah Forest virus is to prevent mosquito bites. There is no vaccine against it.
Priority groups and settings
People who regularly spend a lot of time outdoors are most at risk.
It is important to take steps to prevent mosquito bites.
People at greater risk of severe disease
Anyone can develop prolonged symptoms.
People at greater risk of exposure
People are at increased risk of being exposed if they:
- work or spend a lot of time outdoors
- are in coastal regions with salt marshes
- spend time near wetlands, rivers and other bodies of freshwater.
Diagnosis and treatment
Healthcare professionals can diagnose Barmah Forest virus infection through a blood test.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
There is no specific treatment for Barmah Forest virus infection. Some people may take pain-relief medicines to help with joint pain.
Read more about how to manage and treat Barmah Forest virus infection.
Surveillance and reporting
Barmah Forest virus infection is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new laboratory confirmed cases or probable cases to us through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
This is part of national surveillance activities to monitor case numbers around the country and understand disease patterns.
Public health authorities take a One Health approach to the surveillance of Barmah Forest virus. In addition to human disease surveillance, relevant government departments help monitor Barmah Forest virus in mosquitoes and animals.
We analyse the data and publish case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
Outbreaks
Control measures used during outbreaks focus on humans, animals and the environment, and might include:
- animal surveillance to track where the virus is
- mosquito control activities
- mosquito bite prevention education and promotion.
Support
For information about Barmah Forest virus infection in your state or territory, see:
- Australian Capital Territory
- New South Wales
- Northern Territory
- Queensland
- South Australia
- Tasmania
- Victoria
- Western Australia.
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.