What the journal is
The CDI journal publishes:
- original academic articles
- surveillance reports
- short reports
- letters to the editor
- policy and guidelines
- notices to readers
- editorials.
Original articles, short reports and letters to the editor are peer reviewed by trusted experts in the field, ensuring the quality of the research published.
Stay up to date
Email us to subscribe to email updates.
Why it’s important
All content in CDI is free to access via the Open Journal Systems platform.
Thousands of people access CDI articles, which helps further research and understanding of various public health risks. This open sharing of information can lead to better interventions to protect people’s health and wellbeing.
CDI’s extensive evidence-base of significant academic and research study also informs our work to tackle communicable diseases in Australia.
Five decades of history
CDI has been published as a bulletin, and later a journal, since 1977.
Today, CDI also acts as a historical archive of public health information, with an extensive repository of articles dating back to the journal’s origins.
The Open Journal Systems platform contains all CDI articles published from 1977 onward.
CDI is:
- listed on MEDLINE
- indexed by PubMed, an online searchable index of published articles and authors
- available full-text on
Submissions
CDI encourages submissions, relevant to the communicable disease situation in Australia and the near region, from:
- practitioners, researchers, and technical experts in all disciplines across the public health field
- advanced trainees and postgraduate students
Read submissions instructions to authors.
Editorial team
The editorial team consists of:
- Editor – Elise Firman
- Deputy Editor – Simon Petrie
- Design and Production – Lisa Thompson.
An Editorial Advisory Board supports the editorial team.
Editorial Advisory Board
The CDI Editorial Advisory Board:
- provides expert advice to the editorial team
- advocates for CDI in the broader community
- serves as a critical sounding board for the editorial team on editorial ideas and themes
- provides ideas for features and news and thoughts on current trends
- provides constructive feedback on published issues.
The current EAB members are:
Becoming a reviewer
If you are interested in becoming a reviewer for CDI, email the editorial team with your details and areas of expertise.
Contact
Communicable Diseases Intelligence contact
International Standard Serial Number (ISSN)
ISSN: 2209-6051 (Online)
Disclaimer
Opinions expressed in Communicable Diseases Intelligence are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Australian Government, the interim Australian Centre for Disease Control or the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing. Data may be subject to revision.