About respiratory viruses
Respiratory viruses can make you sick with cold or flu-like symptoms. They are usually more common during autumn and winter, but can spread at any time and place where people gather.
People are usually most infectious during the first few days of their symptoms, sometimes even before symptoms start.
Common respiratory viruses include:
- influenza (flu)
- SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
- respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
- rhinoviruses
- adenoviruses
- human parainfluenza viruses (HPIV)
- human metapneumovirus (HMPV).
How they spread
Respiratory viruses can spread through the air. When someone with a respiratory virus talks, coughs, sneezes or breathes, small particles containing the virus can come out of their mouth or nose and infect you. You can get infected if you breathe these in or if they land on your eyes, nose or mouth.
Spending time close to someone with a respiratory virus increases your risk of getting infected. But some respiratory viruses can spread over longer distances through tiny airborne particles. This is more likely to happen indoors, especially in places that are crowded or have poor ventilation.
Sometimes viruses can survive on objects or surfaces. If you touch something that has the virus on it and then touch your mouth, nose or eyes, you could get infected.
Prevention
Protecting yourself
To reduce your risk of viral respiratory infections:
- stay up to date with recommended vaccinations
- avoid contact with anybody who has symptoms and don’t share drinks, cups, utensils or towels
- improve ventilation, such as by opening doors and windows
- wash or sanitise your hands regularly
- avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth, especially when around people who are unwell
- maintain physical distance between yourself and others
- regularly clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are used often, such as mobile phones and door handles.
When respiratory viruses are circulating in your community, you may choose to take extra steps to protect yourself by:
- avoiding crowded places, especially indoors
- wearing a mask, especially in indoor crowded places, such as on public transport.
If you think you may be at greater risk of severe illness, you can:
- speak to your healthcare professional early about the steps you should take if you become sick
- get tested early if you get cold or flu symptoms to help your healthcare professional choose the most appropriate management.
Protecting others
Taking steps to protect yourself also protects others, because you are less likely to get infected and pass a virus on.
If you do get sick, to protect others from becoming infected:
- stay at home until your symptoms are gone
- wear a mask if you need to be around other people
- avoid contact with people who may be at greater risk of becoming severely unwell, such as
- older people
- young children
- people with weakened immune systems
- avoid visiting high-risk settings, such as hospitals or aged care homes
- don’t share drinks, cups, other utensils or towels
- wash or sanitise your hands regularly
- cough or sneeze into your elbow or a tissue and dispose of used tissues in the bin (then wash your hands).
Keep babies and children home from childcare, school or activities if they are unwell.