Current vacancies
| Job name | Closing date | Action |
|---|---|---|
MO6 – Chief Medical Advisor
| 10 May 2026 11:30 pm (AEST) | For a confidential discussion, please call Alison Myatt of Watermark Search International, who is leading the search on behalf of the Australian CDC. Please send your application quoting Ref No A006283 to Watermark Search International via this online form. Watermark will reply to the email address used for your application. |
EL2 – Director Pandemic Preparedness and Biosecurity
| 10 May 2026 11:30 pm (AEST) | |
EL2 – Director One Health
| 10 May 2026 11:30 pm (AEST) |
You can also go to APSJobs to:
- view current vacancies
- register for job alerts.
Who we’re looking for
We’re assembling a dynamic team of trailblazers who are passionate about keeping Australia healthy, safe, and prepared for the future.
This is your opportunity to be part of something transformative.
Whether you're a medical officer, epidemiologist, data scientist, policy strategist or operations expert, your work with us will shape national outcomes and deliver real-world impact.
At the Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC), you’ll be part of building a modern, forward-thinking public health agency from the ground up.
What we offer
We are a new nationally focused public health agency – collaborative, science and evidence driven and internationally connected.
We bring together experts from many disciplines – medicine, science, data, communication, policy, operations and administration – to protect the health of all Australians.
Work your way
We offer working conditions to suit your needs.
This includes:
- work locations in capital cities across Australia
- hybrid and flexible work arrangements
- competitive salaries, including specific broadband structures and salary ranges for professional streams
- a 15.4% employer contribution to superannuation
- generous leave conditions, including:
- annual leave – 20 days per year
- personal or carers leave – 18 days per year
- parental leave – 18 weeks if you’re the primary caregiver and 8 weeks if you’re the secondary caregiver (increasing to 18 weeks by 2026–27)
- cultural leave – 6 days paid leave over 2 years for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employees and 1 day per year for NAIDOC week activities, and 3 days paid leave for other employees
- emergency response leave – 20 days paid leave.
Grow with us
As a new agency, we’re still building – and that means opportunity.
You’ll help shape our systems, culture and future.
We will invest in your development through mentoring, training and professional learning pathways.
Accessibility
We’re committed to accessibility for everyone. From workplace adjustments to accessible technology, we’ll work with you to ensure you can thrive.
Diversity, culture and belonging
We value diversity of background and thought.
We welcome applications from:
- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
- people from culturally and linguistically diverse communities
- people of all abilities and identities.
Wellbeing
We value balance, inclusion and respect. You’ll have access to wellbeing programs, flexible arrangements and support when you need it.
See our enterprise agreement for more details.
Our hiring process
Step 1 – Apply
Email your CV and application to us.
We review all applications after the closing date.
Step 2 – Review and shortlist
Our selection panels assess applications against the role’s requirements – looking at your experience, skills and potential fit.
If you’re shortlisted candidates, we’ll contact you for an interview.
Step 3 – Interview
If shortlisted, you’ll meet the panel for interview.
Step 4 – Outcome
Once the process concludes, we notify all applicants of the outcome.
Eligibility
To be eligible, you must:
- be an Australian citizen
- satisfy the mandatory components of roles as specified in the candidate pack, including eligibility for a minimum baseline security clearance.
Should you be offered a role, pre-employment checks might include:
- a pre-employment health assessment (we will facilitate this, if it is required)
- a police records check
- undergoing security vetting
- providing evidence of
- citizenship
- identification
- qualifications.
Preparing to apply
Understand the job
Before starting your application, review and understand:
- the job’ application kit
- what we do
- the APS work level standards
- APS values and code of conduct.
For tips on applying for a job in the public service, you can also view the Cracking the code fact sheets.
Write your application
Respond to the specific requirements of the role (key responsibilities and key capabilities), in line with the applicant kit.
When you write your application response:
- structure your response to demonstrate your relevant skills, capabilities and experience
- write clearly and concisely
- use correct spelling and grammar
- keep under any limits for the response (number of pages, words).
Read more tips for writing application responses.
Have your documents ready
You will need to provide:
- personal details such as phone number and address
- an up-to-date resume
- written responses to the role requirements
- details of 2 work referees, ideally including your current supervisor.
Apply by closing date
Apply before the closing date – applications will not be accepted after that.
Applying
Follow the instructions under Our hiring process.
You can submit your application via email at jobs@cdc.gov.au up to the closing time.
Once you submit you will receive an email to your nominated email address, which will let you know what other documents to provide to us via email.