About heatwaves
Extreme heat is when the maximum and minimum temperatures are unusually hot for 1 or 2 days at a location.
A heatwave is when maximum and minimum temperatures stay unusually high for 3 or more days, including overnight.
In Australia, heatwaves are becoming hotter, longer and more frequent because of climate change.
Why heatwaves are dangerous
Extreme heat and heatwaves can have a major impact on our health. They kill more Australians than any other environmental hazard.
Heat-related illnesses
Heat can cause serious – sometimes fatal – illness, including:
- dehydration
- heat cramps
- heat rash
- heat exhaustion
- heatstroke.
Heat can also trigger medical events or worsen existing medical conditions, including:
- asthma and other respiratory illnesses
- kidney disease
- heart attack
- stroke
- mental health conditions.
Early symptoms and signs of heat-related illness include:
- thirst
- sweating heavily
- a raised body temperature
- feeling dizzy or faint
- feeling tired or lethargic
- being irritable
- medium to dark coloured urine
- cramping in the arms, legs or abdomen.
If you experience these symptoms, take immediate steps to cool down before they get worse.
Heat exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is serious and can progress to heatstroke. Symptoms and signs of heat exhaustion include:
- high body temperature of 38 °C to 39 °C
- heavy sweating
- pale skin
- persistent muscle cramps
- thirst
- fatigue
- headache
- nausea and vomiting
- fainting
- increased heart rate
- poor coordination.
Take immediate steps to cool down at the first signs of these symptoms.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke is a medical emergency. Call triple zero (000) immediately and ask for an ambulance if yourself or someone is experiencing symptoms.
Heatstroke occurs when the body can no longer regulate its temperature.
Symptoms and signs include:
- hot, dry skin with no sweating
- sudden rises in body temperature to more than 40 °C
- dehydration and intense thirst
- rapid heart rate and breathing
- nausea and vomiting
- unusual behaviour, confusion and slurred speech
- loss of consciousness, seizures or coma.
Take immediate steps to cool the person while waiting for emergency treatment.
People at greater risk of heat-related illness
Extreme heat can affect anybody, but can be especially dangerous for:
- people who exercise, play sport or are physically active outdoors
- people who work outside or in hot environments, such as hot and poorly ventilated areas
- older people, particularly those who
- live alone
- live with existing medical conditions
- don’t have air conditioning or do not use it due to cost of electricity
- babies and young children
- pregnant people and people who are breastfeeding
- people with existing medical conditions, including
- people with disability
- people who are socially isolated or living alone
- people experiencing homelessness
- people on certain medications that can increase the risk from heat, including
- diuretics
- beta-blockers
- drugs with anticholinergic properties
- antipsychotics
- antidepressants
- central nervous system stimulants.
Check in on your neighbours, friends and family – by staying in touch, we can help each other stay safe.
Staying safe in the heat
Keeping your environment cool
- Stay inside and out of the sun – if you have to go outside, go early mornings and late afternoons, and wear sunscreen and a broad-brimmed hat.
- Close windows, external doors and internal doors to keep the hot air out.
- Stay in the coolest room in the house.
- Close curtains or blinds to block the sun from shining in.
- Use air-conditioning and electric fans, if you can.
- If you don’t have air conditioning, go somewhere that does like a shopping centre or library if it is safe to do so.
- Avoid using the stove or oven.
- Open windows overnight when the outside temperature is lower than the inside temperature.
Keeping your body cool
- Drink plenty of water.
- Avoid drinks that can dehydrate you, like soft drinks, alcohol, tea, coffee, and other sweetened or caffeinated drinks.
- Wear loose, lightweight clothing and remove unnecessary clothing.
- Keep your skin wet with a spray bottle or facecloth.
- Wrap ice in a damp towel and place it on your neck and chest.
- Limit physical activity, especially outdoors, and take regular 10-minute breaks.
- Take cool showers or baths – even cold footbaths can help.
- Go swimming in cool water – preferably in the shade – if you have access to it.
Learn more
For more information, see:
- heatwave forecasts
- hot weather risks and staying cool
- avoiding heat-related illnesses
- what to do if someone has heatstroke
- heat health preparedness guidance for health and community services.
See more information in your state and territory: