At a glance
About bird flu
Bird flu (also called avian influenza) is caused by specific influenza A viruses that typically infect birds. These viruses are different to those that cause human flu.
Bird flu rarely spreads to people. When it does, it causes a respiratory infection.
The current risk of bird flu to people in Australia is low.
If you find sick or dead birds
Australia is monitoring H5 bird flu in birds and other animals.
If you find multiple sick or dead birds or animals:
- avoid the area
- record your location and what you see (take photos or video, if possible)
- report this information to the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
Why it matters to public health
Bird flu in people is rare but can cause severe disease or death. Spread from person-to-person is very rare.
Bird flu viruses can mutate quickly, especially during outbreaks. If a bird flu virus changes so that it can more easily infect people, it might cause a localised outbreak and then possibly a pandemic.
A person with bird flu was reported in Australia in 2024. The person was infected overseas and then returned home to Australia. The person was managed in hospital and recovered. The virus did not spread to anyone else.
A type of H5 bird flu – called H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b – is causing outbreaks in animals overseas. Many poultry, wild birds and mammals have been infected, so people are coming in contact with the virus more often. Although some people have been infected with H5 bird flu overseas, it hasn’t spread from person to person.
Australia is the only continent free of H5 bird flu, but migratory wild birds might bring it here.
Because of these major impacts, and the potential for person-to-person spread, we:
Symptoms
If you’re looking for advice about your own health or treatment options, see healthdirect or speak with a qualified healthcare professional. Our role is to provide public health advice – information and guidance that helps prevent disease, protect communities and improve wellbeing at a population level.
Some infected people have no symptoms at all. But symptoms can include:
Symptoms can range from mild to severe.
healthdirect’s symptom checker can help you decide whether to see a health professional.
Check your symptoms
Onset of symptoms
Symptoms usually start about 1 to 10 days after being infected.
How it spreads
Infected animals shed the virus in respiratory droplets and secretions, faeces and other body fluids.
People can become infected if they:
- breathe in contaminated dust or respiratory droplets
- touch an infected animal, their body fluids or something contaminated with the virus, and then touch their eyes, nose or mouth.
Infection usually happens after close contact with infected poultry – for example, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese – or contaminated environments.
It’s very rare for bird flu to spread from person to person.
It is safe to eat properly handled, prepared and cooked meat and eggs.
Infectious period
People infected with bird flu are considered to be infectious from one day before symptoms start until either:
- 7 days after symptoms begin
- acute symptoms are gone (if symptoms remain after 7 days)
Prevention
Vaccination
Getting an annual flu vaccination is important. It is recommended for all people older than 6 months.
Although it does not protect against bird flu infection, it:
- protects you from getting sick with human flu and bird flu at the same time
- reduces the risk of seasonal flu and bird flu viruses mixing to create a more dangerous influenza virus.
It’s especially important for poultry workers and other people at greater risk of exposure for this reason.
Other prevention steps
The best way to protect against bird flu is to:
- wash your hands thoroughly before and immediately after handling any bird (even if healthy)
- stay away from sick or dead birds and their
- surroundings
- droppings
- body fluids
- feathers
- eggs
- not allow pets to touch or eat sick and dead birds
- thoroughly cook meat and eggs before eating.
If travelling
If you are travelling overseas:
- stay away from sick or dead animals (especially poultry) and places they are in, including
- poultry farms and backyard chicken enclosures
- areas with free ranging poultry
- live animal ‘wet’ markets
- ensure meat and animal products are cooked thoroughly before eating
- do not consume raw (unpasteurised) milk
- regularly check the health advice on Smartraveller.
If you get symptoms within 10 days of contact with sick or dead birds (or animals, if travelling overseas):
- call your health professional and tell them you have been around birds
- follow general advice to prevent the spread of your viral respiratory illness.
Priority groups and settings
People at greater risk of severe disease
Because there are so few human cases and so many subtypes of bird flu, we do not yet fully know which groups are at greater risk of severe disease.
We expect they are similar to those for seasonal flu, and might include:
If you are at greater risk, it is especially important to take steps to protect yourself.
People at greater risk of exposure
Anyone who works, cares or volunteers with birds is more likely to be exposed to bird flu, especially poultry workers and outbreak responders.
Read more about protecting your employees or yourself.
Diagnosis and treatment
Your healthcare professional can diagnose bird flu with a test.
Make sure you tell them if you have been in contact with birds.
The sample is usually collected from your nose or throat with a swab and sent to a laboratory for testing. If you have conjunctivitis, a swab may be taken from your eye.
Your healthcare professional might also refer you for blood tests.
You can use healthdirect’s directory to find a health service near you.
Find a health service
Most people with bird flu receive antiviral treatment to prevent severe disease.
Surveillance and reporting
Bird flu is a nationally notifiable disease – these are diseases that present a risk to public health.
Health authorities in each state and territory report new confirmed cases to us through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
This is part of national surveillance activities to monitor case numbers around the country and understand disease patterns.
We analyse the data and publish case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
Agricultural authorities work with non-government organisations to monitor wild birds for bird flu.
Outbreaks
All outbreaks in animals require a public health response to protect people from infected animals.
In Australia, all past animal outbreaks have been in poultry and were successfully eliminated.
Actions public health authorities might take include:
- identifying and managing people exposed to infected animals
- educating people about how to protect themselves and others
- working with agricultural authorities and affected industries
- putting in place extra infection prevention and control precautions – such as personal protective equipment
- encouraging annual flu vaccination for people work in the outbreak site.
Read more about how the Australian Government defines and plans for outbreaks and pandemics.
Support
For more information see:
For information about bird flu in your state or territory see:
If you need mental health support, see a list of organisations, websites and services that offer support, counselling and information.
For travel advice, see Smartraveller.
Quick links
Disease
Infectious agent
Avian influenza in humans is an acute respiratory infection caused by influenza A viruses that typically infect birds.
Like all influenza A viruses, avian influenza viruses are classified into subtypes by 2 surface proteins:
- haemagglutinin (H)
- neuraminidase (N).
Avian influenza virus subtypes – for example, H5N1 and H7N9 – are formed through different combinations of these surface proteins.
Each subtype differs in its ability to spread and cause disease.
Avian influenza in humans is most often caused by:[1]
- H5N1
- H5N6
- H7N7
- H7N9
- H9N2.
Avian influenza viruses are further classified into genetic subgroups called clades, which help track:
- viral evolution
- geographic spread
- changes in disease severity.
For example, H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b is closely monitored due to its potential to affect people.
Avian influenza viruses are also classified by severity of disease (pathogenicity) in poultry, as either:
- high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI)
- low pathogenicity avian influenza (LPAI).
HPAI and LPAI viruses can cause severe disease in people.[1][2] Whenever they are detected they require a public health response.
Water birds – such as waterfowl, gulls and shorebirds – are the main natural reservoir for avian influenza viruses.
Read more about the epidemiology of avian influenza in people.
Clinical presentation
Avian influenza in people causes a wide range of illness – from no symptoms to very severe disease and death.
Signs and symptoms typically include:
Serious complications include:
Read more about:
Public health importance
Avian influenza is a public health priority globally and in Australia.
Avian influenza in people is rare but can cause severe disease or death.
Although person-to-person transmission is also very uncommon, influenza A viruses mutate quickly.
If an avian influenza virus evolves to the point where it easily spreads from person to person, it might cause localised outbreaks and then possibly a pandemic.
Because of these major health impacts, we:
Epidemiology
Human infections are detected sporadically across the world. Spread from person-to-person is rare, with the last documented cases reported overseas in 2007(H5N1)[3] and 2016 (H7N9)[4].
Severe disease and death are most commonly reported in:
In Australia in 2010, a group of abattoir workers were infected with H10N7 and experienced conjunctivitis and mild upper respiratory symptoms.[7]
In 2024, Australia reported its first human infection caused by H5N1. The person was infected with clade 2.3.2.1a while travelling overseas and made a full recovery.[8]
Learn more about current outbreaks in animals in Australia.
Global spread of H5N1 in animals
Since 2020, a global animal outbreak of H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b has caused illness and high mortality in:
- poultry
- wild birds
- several previously unaffected mammalian species.
Australia is the only continent free of this specific clade.
Although infections of this clade have increased in people overseas – especially since 2024 – they remain rare.
Almost all cases were caused by exposure to poultry or – in the United States of America only – to dairy cattle.
Most human infections detected in 2024 and 2025 were mild, but some caused severe illness and death.
The rising number of infections in mammals and people increases the risk of the virus evolving to spread among people.
The Australian Government is preparing a whole-of-government response in the event that H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b is found in animals in Australia.
Spread of infection
Transmission
Infected animals shed the virus in respiratory droplets, faeces and other body fluids.
Transmission primarily occurs by:
- inhaling infectious respiratory droplets or contaminated dust
- touching infected animals or contaminated items or surfaces and then touching the eyes, nose or mouth.
People are usually infected after close contact with infected poultry or contaminated areas.[9]
Spread from person to person is rare.
In specific circumstances – limited to the United States – exposure to raw milk from infected dairy cattle has caused H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b infections in people.[10]
There is no evidence that avian influenza can spread to people by consuming meat or eggs that have been properly handled and thoroughly cooked.[11]
Incubation period
Symptoms usually start between 1 and 10 days after exposure to the virus.
Infectious period
An infected person is considered infectious from 1 day before the onset of symptoms to 7 days after symptoms begin, or until acute symptoms resolve – whichever is longer.
Read more about infectious period of avian influenza.
Priority populations
People at greater risk of severe disease
Groups at greater risk of severe disease are not well defined due to differences across subtypes and the limited number of infections in people.
We expect they are similar to seasonal influenza, and might include:
- babies and young children aged under 5 years
- older people (aged 65 years or over)
- people who are pregnant
- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
- people with certain chronic conditions
- people who are immunocompromised
- people who smoke.
Read more about:
People at greater risk of exposure
Anyone working with or caring for poultry and other birds is at risk of exposure. Poultry workers and poultry outbreak responders face the highest risk.
Read more about:
Settings at increased risk of spread
Avian influenza has previously been detected in poultry on Australian farms.
When found in commercial poultry, a coordinated response from state or territory agricultural and public health authorities manages the risks to both animals and people.
Read more about:
Prevention
Vaccination
Annual seasonal influenza vaccination is recommended for anyone in Australia aged 6 months and over.
Seasonal influenza vaccination does not protect against avian influenza, but it plays another important role.
If a person is infected with both seasonal and avian influenza at the same time, the 2 viruses can mix to form a new influenza virus that is more dangerous to people.
For this reason, seasonal influenza vaccination is especially important for people who:
- work with poultry or other birds
- travel to countries with avian influenza outbreaks.
During a poultry outbreak, seasonal influenza vaccination is specifically recommended for commercial poultry workers.
See:
Other prevention steps
Simple measures to prevent avian influenza infection in the community include:
- washing hands thoroughly before and immediately after handling any bird (even if healthy)
- staying away from sick or dead birds and their:
- surrounding environments
- droppings
- body fluid
- feathers
- eggs.
- not allowing pets to touch or eat sick or dead birds
- calling a health professional if symptoms occur within 10 days of contact with sick or dead birds.
Avian influenza is not a commercial food safety concern in Australia. Learn more about food safety and avian influenza.
If travelling
People travelling overseas should:
- stay away from sick or dead animals – especially birds – and any areas where they are present, including:
- poultry farms and backyard chicken enclosures
- areas with free ranging poultry
- live animal ‘wet’ markets
- ensure meat and animal products are cooked thoroughly before eating
- not consume raw (unpasteurised) milk
- regularly check the health advice for relevant countries on Smartraveller.
Prevention among priority populations
It is especially important for people at increased risk of severe disease to:
- stay away from sick or dead birds
- call a health professional as soon as symptoms start, if they have been around sick or dead birds.
Read more about tailored information for:
Diagnosis and clinical management
Diagnosis
Avian influenza is diagnosed through laboratory testing.
Nucleic acid testing is the recommended diagnostic test. Samples are usually taken from the nose and throat. If there are conjunctival (eye) symptoms, a conjunctival swab may be collected.
Serological testing (via a blood test) may be used for public health surveillance.
Specialised reference laboratories can perform additional testing to confirm the viral subtype and clade.
Triaging influenza A samples for reference laboratory testing relies on the treating healthcare professional providing key clinical and epidemiological information, such as:
- disease severity
- recent travel
- contact with birds or infected people.
Rapid antigen tests are not recommended when avian influenza is suspected. These tests are less sensitive than nucleic acid testing and prevent subtype and clade detection.
Some avian influenza viruses that present a risk to people are classified as ‘highly pathogenic influenza virus, infecting humans’ under the Security Sensitive Biological Agent Regulatory Scheme. Laboratories and other facilities handling Security Sensitive Biological Agents must follow regulatory requirements.
Read more about:
Laboratory case definition
The Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) has developed standard case definitions for the diagnosis of key diseases in Australia. This document contains the laboratory case definition for influenza.
Clinical management
Influenza antiviral treatment is recommended as soon as possible for anyone suspected to have avian influenza infection, to help prevent severe disease.
Read more about the clinical management of avian influenza cases.
Notification and reporting
Surveillance case definition
This document contains the surveillance case definition for avian influenza in humans, which is nationally notifiable within Australia. State and territory health departments use this definition to decide whether to notify us of a case.
National notification and reporting
Avian influenza is a nationally notifiable disease. This means certain health professionals must report diagnoses through their relevant health authorities.
Check how to report laboratory-confirmed avian influenza cases or related death in your state or territory:
State and territory health authorities report new cases to us daily through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, as part of our surveillance activities.
We report case numbers and other data through our data visualisation tool, where you can filter and search the latest information.
Other surveillance activities
Australia takes a One Health approach to surveillance of avian influenza. Agricultural authorities work with non-government organisations to monitor wild birds for avian influenza.
Read more about wild bird surveillance.
Public health response
Public health authorities adopt a One Health approach to avian influenza outbreaks.
This approach recognises how connections between people, animals and the environment contribute to avian influenza spread, including:
- novel or endemic avian influenza viruses circulating in wild water birds
- spillover from wild birds into poultry or other animals
- local animal industries – such as poultry farms – that might be at risk of outbreaks.
Key groups involved in preventing and responding to poultry outbreaks to protect animals and people include:
- public health authorities
- agricultural authorities
- environmental departments
- the poultry industry
- landowners.
The CDNA national guidelines for public health units inform the public health response to avian influenza outbreaks in both people and poultry.
These guidelines for Public Health Units provide nationally consistent guidance on how to respond to avian influenza. They are part of a Series of National Guidelines (SoNGs) published by the Communicable Diseases Network Australia (CDNA).
Management of cases
Public health authorities urgently respond to all confirmed and probable cases of avian influenza in humans, with input from an expert panel.
Case management focuses on:
- identifying the likely source of infection – typically infected poultry
- identifying and assessing contacts
- providing education and advice on
- when to seek further medical care
- how to prevent onward transmission.
Cases are recommended to isolate for at least 7 days after symptom onset or until symptoms resolve. People who are immunocompromised might need extended isolation.
Healthcare settings should implement extra measures when avian influenza is suspected or confirmed, including:
- using standard and transmission-based precautions
- using negative pressure rooms
- seeking input from infectious disease specialists and infection control teams
- ensuring treating healthcare professionals are vaccinated against seasonal influenza.
Read more:
Public health units manage contacts by:
- monitoring for 10 days after their last exposure
- providing information about symptoms, transmission and when to seek medical care
- advising to isolate and organise urgent testing if symptoms develop
- supporting contacts throughout the monitoring period.
Contacts may be offered antiviral medication and asked to avoid unnecessary visits to high-risk settings – such as aged care, childcare or healthcare facilities – unless seeking medical attention.
Read more about contact management.
Outbreak response
To date, public health responses to avian influenza in Australia have mainly been triggered by infections in poultry.
How public health agencies respond depends on:
- state or territory legislation
- the nature of the detected avian influenza virus
- available resources.
See information about how public health units should respond to avian influenza outbreaks in both people and poultry.
Special situations and high-risk settings
Commercial poultry workers are at higher risk of being exposed to avian influenza.
Avian influenza outbreaks on poultry farms trigger a joint One Health response from the:
- state or territory agricultural authority (lead agency)
- state or territory public health authority
- affected setting – for example, a poultry farm or producer.
Public health actions focus on:
- identifying and managing people who have had contact with infected poultry
- taking extra infection prevention and control precautions
- tailoring heath education for affected workers
- encouraging seasonal influenza vaccination for unvaccinated workers.
See information on how public health units should respond to avian influenza outbreaks in poultry.
Control measures taken by the state or territory agricultural agencies may include:
- preventing movement of infected poultry, poultry products and equipment
- determining the source and extent of infection
- depopulation of affected poultry farms
- cleaning and disinfection of contaminated equipment and environments.
Read more in the:
Resources
See the:
References
-
1 Center for Disease Control and Prevention United States of America, ‘Reported human infections with avian influenza A viruses’, 1 February 2024, accessed 12 July 2025.
-
2 N Xiang, X Li et al., ‘Assessing change in avian influenza A (H7N9) virus infections during the fourth epidemic – China, September 2015 to August 2016’, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2016, 65(49):1390–1394,doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6549a2.
-
3 H Wang, Z Feng et al., ‘Probable limited person-to-person transmission of highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) virus in China’, The Lancet, 2007, 371(9622):1427–1434,doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60493-6.
-
4 ZH Zhang, LS Meng et al., ‘A Suspected person-to-person transmission of avian influenza A (H7N9) case in ward’, Chinese Medical Journal (English), 2017, 130(10):1255–1256,doi:10.4103/0366-6999.205849.
-
5 World Health Organization,Cumulative number of confirmed human cases for avian influenza A(H5N1) reported to WHO, 2003–2025, 27 May 2025, accessed 8 July 2025.
-
6 W Zhu, X Li et al., ‘Epidemiologic, clinical, and genetic characteristics of human infections with influenza A (H5N6) viruses, China’, Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2022, 28(7):1332–1344,doi:10.3201/eid2807.212482.
-
7 GG Arzey, PD Kirkland et al., ‘Influenza virus A (H10N7) in chickens and poultry abattoir workers, Australia’, Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2012, 18(5):814–816, doi:10.3201/eid1805.111852.
-
8 World Health Organization (WHO), Avian Influenza A (H5N1) – Australia, Disease Outbreak News, 7 June 2024, accessed 16 February 2026.
-
9 R Badra, W Zhang et al., ‘Transmission pathways of zoonotic influenza viruses and influencing factors: A systematic review of recent findings’, Viruses,2025, 17(6):857,doi:10.3390/v17060857.
-
10 Campbell AJ, Brizuela K, et al.,‘mGem: Transmission and exposure risks of dairy cow H5N1 influenza virus’, mBio,2025, 16:e02944–24,doi:10.1128/mbio.02944-24.
-
11 B O’Brien, L Goodridge et al., ‘Exploring the potential of foodborne transmission of respiratory viruses’, Food Microbiology, 2021, 95:103709, doi:10.1016/j.fm.2020.103709.